

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : //books . qooqle . com/| 




Textbook of elementary biology 



Henry Johnstone Campbell 



^cAux.TJoZ&f&J'S'*' 



Harvard College 
Library 




THE GUT OF 

GRENVILLE HOWLAND NORCROSS 

OF BOSTON 

Glass of 1875 




Digitized 



by Google 



3 2044 102 874 831 



Digitized 



by Google 



TEXT-BOOK 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



TEXT-BOOK 



OF 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY 



H. J. CAMPBELL, M.D. Lond. 

Senior Demonstrator of Biology and Demonstrator of Physiology in the 
Medical School of Guy's Hospital 



WITH A HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SIX ILLUSTRATIONS 




LONDON : 

SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO. 

New York: MACMILLAN & CO. 
1893- 



Digitized 



by Google 



v/ 

HARVARD COLLr.fie LIBRARY 

GIFT OF 
ORENVILU H. NORCROSS 

SEP 4 1935 



Printed by Hazell, Watson, & Viney, I.d., London and Aylesbury. 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE 



IN the following pages, I have endeavoured to give 
a short account of some of the more important 
facts of Biology. I have dealt at some length with 
the subjects of Protoplasm, Cells, Cell-division, Re- 
production, the early stages of Development, and the 
massing together of cells to form Tissues, as these 
subjects are of fundamental importance not only for 
the study of Zoology and Botany, but also for that 
of Physiology and Pathology. The general chapters 
upon Vertebrata, Invertebrata, and Plant Structure are 
very brief, and the student is recommended, should he 
wish to gain a fuller knowledge of these subjects, to 
refer to the more detailed accounts of them given in 
the larger text-books. Among the types which arc 
somewhat fully described in the latter part of the book, 
I have included all those selected by the Conjoint 
Board of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons 
for their examination in Elementary Biology. To these 
I have added a short chapter on the Dog-fish, as a type 
of the lower Craniata. In reading the book for the first 
time, the student is advised, both to study the chapters 
in the order laid down on page xii., and also to read only 



Digitized 



by Google 



vi PREFACE. 

the paragraphs in large print, those in small type being 
intended only as amplifications. In order to obtain clear 
ideas of Biology, it is absolutely necessary that reading 
should be accompanied by the dissection and examina- 
tion of specimens. The student cannot be too strongly 
urged to devote as much time . as possible to practical 
work. 

I have made frequent reference to the following books : 
Thompson's Outlines of Zoology, Marshall and Hurst's 
Practical Zoology, Claus and Sedgwick's Text-book of 
Zoology, Leuckart's Human Parasites, Prantl and Vines' 
Text-book of Botany, and Parker's Elementary Biology. 
In addition to these I have referred to numerous papers 
by Professor Ray Lankester, Mr. W. E. Hoyle, Mr. F. 
E. Beddard, and many others. To all these authors I 
take this opportunity of expressing my grateful ac- 
knowledgments. The sources from which the diagrams 
have been taken are in all cases mentioned. I wish 
especially to thank Messrs. Smith, Elder, & Co., and 
Mr. Pentland, for their kind permission to insert 
diagrams from books published by them. I have 
further to thank Mr. F. E. Beddard for numerous 
suggestions, and also for references to original papers, 
and Dr. Washbourne for his friendly criticism of the 
chapter on Bacteria. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CONTENTS. 



CHAP. PAGE 

PREFACE V 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS ix 

I. INTRODUCTION I 

II. PROTOPLASM 3 

III. CELLS IO 

IV. CELL DIVISION 20 

V. REPRODUCTION AND THE EARLY STAGES OF DEVELOP- 
MENT 23 

VI. TISSUES .... 40 

VII. ANIMAL TISSUES 43 

VIII. PLANT TISSUES $2 

IX. GENERAL REVIEW OF PLANT STRUCTURE. ... 63 

X. DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PLANTS AND ANIMALS . . 79 

XL GENERAL REVIEW OF THE INVERTEBRATA 83 

XII. GENERAL REVIEW OF THE VERTEBRATA . . . 1 20 

XIII. AMCEBA I56 

XIV. YEAST PLANT (TORULA OR SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISI^E) l6l 
XV. PROTOCOCCUS VIRIDIS J PROTOCOCCUS OR HiEMATO- 

COCCUS PLUVIALISJ GLEOCAPSA 1 64 

XVI. BACTERIA 170 



Digitized 



by Google 



CONTENTS. 



CHAP. PAGE 

XVII. VORTICELLA 1 76 

XVIII. GREGARIN.E 1 83 

XIX. HYDRA l88 

XX. THE LIVER-FLUKE (FASCIOLA HEPATICA) .197 

XXI. TAPE-WORMS (CESTODES) 208 

XXII. ROUND WORMS (NEMATODES) 229 

XXIII. THE MEDICINAL LEECH (HIRUDO MEDICINALIS) . . 24 1 

XXIV. THE DOG-FISH (SCYLLIUM CANICULA) .... 252 
XXV. GENERAL REVIEW OF THE MAMMALIA .256 

INDEX AND GLOSSARY 267 



Digitized 



by Google 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



FIG. PAGE 

i. A cell from a staminal hair of Tradescantia virginica 7 

s. Immature egg-cell of an Echinoderm as a typical animal cell 10 

3. Various forms of plant cells n 

4. Plant cells of different stages of growth 14 

5. Spirogyra showing chromatophores, pyrenoids, etc 16 

6. Chlorophyll corpuscles x8 

7. Cell division 21 

8. Egg-cell 24 

9. Formation of polar vesicles in Asterias glacialis 25 

10. Spermatozoa of animals 26 

n. Young ova and sperm mother-cells 27 

12. Egg-cell in process of fertilisation showing male and female pronuclei . 27 

13. Fertilised egg-cell 27 

14. Unequal segmentation of Frog's egg 28 

15. Diagram of an egg with protoplasm forming a germ disc .... 29 

16. Segmentation of the germinal disc of a Hen's egg 30 

17. Blastulaof Amphioxus 31 

18. Blastula of Triton taeniatus 31 

19. Formation of the gastrula in Amphioxus 32 

20. Diagram of Hen's egg 32 

21. Section through the germ disc of a Hen's egg 33 

22. Longitudinal section through the germ disc of a Finch's egg • • 33 

23. Surface view of the area pellucida in the blastoderm of a Chick ... 34 

24. Optical sections of a segmenting Rabbit's egg in two stages • • • 35 

25. Rabbit's egg 70 to 90 hours after fertilisation 36 

26. Diagram to show the derivation of the Coelom 38 

27. Diagram of the development of the alimentary canal of a Ch'ck . . 39 

28. Epithelial cells 44 

29. White fibrous tissue 45 

30. Hyaline cartilage 46 

31. Transverse section of bone 46 

2. Striated muscle . . . . 48 





Digitized 



by Google 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



FIG. PAGE 

33. Non-striated muscle 49 

34. Nerve cells 50 

35. Hairs on young ovary of Cucurbita 53 

36. Transverse section of leaf showing a Stoma 54 

37. Transverse section of petiole of Helleborus 55 

38. Transverse and longitudinal sections of fibrovascular bundle of Sunflower 57 

39. Transverse section of a root of Acorus calamus 59 

40. Longitudinal section of root apex of Hordeum vulgare .... 61 

41. Sexual and asexual reproduction in Eurotium repens 64 

43. Thallus of Fucus vesiculosus 65 

43. Nitella flexilis and Chara fragilis 67 

44. Development of the sporogonium of Funaria hygrometrica . ... 68 

45. Sporangia of Scolopendrium vulgare 69 

46. Prothallium of a Fern 70 

47. Antheridium of Adiantum capillus veneris 71 

48. Archegonium of Polypodium vulgare 72 

49. Prothallium and young asexual plant of Adiantum 72 

50. Diagram of a flower 73 

51. Different forms of pistils in flowers 74 

52. Diagrams of hypogynous, perigynous and epigynous flowers ... 75 

53. Ovuliferous scale of Pinus sylvestris 76 

54. Longitudinal section through ovule of Picea vulgaris 77 

55. Growing cells of Yeast So 

56. Longitudinal section through a Sponge (Sycon raphanus) .... 86 

57. Branch of an Obelia stock 88 

58. Branch of a Polyparium of Corallium rubrum S9 

59. Distomum haematobium (Bilharzia haematobia) 92 

60. Lumbricus rubellus 93 

61. Generative organs of Lumbricus 95 

62. A Star-fish (Echinaster sentus) 97 

63. Diagram of the water vascular system of a Star-fish 98 

64. Development of a Feather-star (Antedon rosacea) 101 

65. Nauplius and adult stages of Sacculina purpurea and pupa of Lernaeodiscus 

porcellanae 103 

66. Longitudinal section through a Cray-fish 104 

67. Gryllus campestris 106 

68. Digestive apparatus and renal tubes of the Honey bee . .107 

69. Larva of Ephemera showing tracheal gills 109 

70. Formica herculanea and Formica rufa m 

71. Female spiders 113 

72. Demodex folliculorum 114 

73. Pentastomum denticulatum 115 

74. Swan mussel (Anodon) "7 

75. Head and anterior region of skeleton of Dog-fish 124 



Digitized 



by Google 



LIS! OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



FIG. PAGE 

76. Skeleton of an Egyptian vulture 126 

77. Skeleton of hand of Orang, Dog, Pig, Ox, Tapir, and Horse . . .128 

78. Median longitudinal section of a Sheep's skull 129 

79. Alimentary system of a Bird 132 

80. Alimentary canal of Man 134 

81. Longitudinal section of anterior half of a Cat 136 

82. Blood corpuscles of various Animals 138 

83. Diagram of the circulatory organs of a Fish 139 

84. Aortic arches of the Tadpole 141 

85. Diagram of the circulatory system in a higher Vertebrate . . . .143 

86. Diagram of the renal excretory organs (nephridia) of a Worm . . -145 

87. Diagram of the renal excretory organs of a Dog-fish embryo . . 146 

88. Ciliated funnel and Malpighian body from kidney of Proteus . . . 147 

89. Diagrams of the brain of a Human embryo 148 

90. Brain and anterior part of spinal cord of a Fish (Hexanchus griseus) . 149 

91. Nervous system of the Frog 151 

92. Female generative organs in Mammals 153 

93. Urinary and sexual organs in a Mouse 154 

94. Amoebae 157 

95. Growing cells of the Yeast plant 161 

96. Protococcus viridis 165 

97. Gleocapsa .... 168 

98. Bacteria of the fur of teeth 170 

99. Bacteria, isolated and in zooglcea condition -173 

too. Vorticella 178 

tox. Vorticella microstoma showing fission and conjugation . . . .181 

102. Gregarina 185 

103. Diagrammatic longitudinal section of Hydra 189 

104. Longitudinal section through body-wall of Hydra 191 

105. Liver-fluke from the ventral surface 199 

106. Liver-fluke from the ventral surface showing reproductive organs . . 202 

107. Five stages in the life history of the Liver-fluke 204 

108. Head of Taenia solium 209 

109. Half-ripe and ripe joints of Taenia solium 209 

no. Two joints of Taenia solium showing uterus 209 

in. The development of Taenia solium to the Cysticercus stage . . .211 

112. Measly pork 212 

113. Bothriocephalus latus 216 

114. Echinococcus, developmental stages 217 

115. Taenia mediocanellata (saginata) 219 

116. Transverse section of a joint of Taenia mediocanellata . . . .221 

117. Longitudinal section of a joint of Taenia mediocanellata .... 222 

118. Head of Taenia serrata showing excretory vessels 223 

xig. Proglottis of Taenia mediocanellata showing reproductive organs . . 225 



Digitized 



by Google 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



living matter grows by intussusception, that is to say, the new 
material is taken up by and becomes inseparably combined with 
the old. 

3. Its capacity for reproducing itself.— In living matter the 
race is perpetuated by the detachment of portions, which tend 
to run through the same cycle of forms as the parent. 

In Biology, chiefly for the sake of convenience, a broad 
distinction is made between plants and animals, the study of 
plants being termed Botany, and that of animals Zoology. 
However, as it will be seen later, it is by no means easy to 
define the line of distinction between plants and animals, 
especially in their lowest forms. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER II. 
PROTOPLASM. 

PROTOPLASM (trpwros, first ; wkdcrfia, anything formed), 
or as it has been more appropriately called Bioplasm, 
is a viscid, semi-fluid substance, exceedingly complex in its 
chemical composition. Its constitution cannot be represented 
by any chemical formula, as no chemical analysis can be 
made of it. It cannot, of necessity, be analysed while alive, 
as it is in such a state of unstable equilibrium, that the very 
attempt to analyse it at once causes its disintegration, and 
death so materially alters its composition and the arrangement 
of its molecules, that it practically is no longer protoplasm. 

Protoplasm then is a living whole whose molecules, being in 
a most unstable condition, are very liable to assume other 
relative positions. What is then the force which binds these 
molecules together, as it were in spite of themselves ? We do 
not know. For want of a better name we call it Vital Force. 
When it is overcome, death ensues, and we deal no longer 
with living, but with dead matter, which as such may be 
subjected to analysis and may have its composition determined. 
We must not forget, however, that then its whole character is 
altered ; we are no longer dealing with a single living substance, 
but with a mixture of dead substances. 

One of the most striking characteristics of protoplasm is its 
irritability or excitability. By this is meant the readiness with 



Digitized 



by Google 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



which it reacts to stimuli. A force, which is not powerful 
enough to kill it, and thus to cause its complete disintegration, 
will yet cause some change in the relative positions of its 
molecules. For instance, a strong current of electricity will 
kill protoplasm, whereas a weak one will only cause it to 
contract. 

Another very striking characteristic of protoplasm is its need 
of oxygen. It requires a constant supply of this gas to main- 
tain its activity. This great greed for oxygen of necessity 
makes protoplasm a strong reducing or deoxidising agent. 

The oxygen which protoplasm is continually absorbing, is as 
continually being given out again combined with carbon in the 
form of carbon dioxide. 

Thus we have observed four of the most important charac- 
teristics of protoplasm. 

1. Its instability. 

2. Its irritability. 

3. Its reducing or deoxidising power. 

4. Its power of giving np carbon dioxide. 

Chemical Nature of Protoplasm. 

Dead protoplasm can be analysed, and its composition determined. It 
is found to consist of proteid, water, carbohydrates, fat, and salts. Of 
these by far the most abundant, and the most important, are the proteid 
and the water. The greater the activity of the protoplasm during life, the 
greater will be the amount of water which can be extracted from it after 
death. 

The proteid contained in dead protoplasm is a complex substance, the 
composition of which we are unable to express in the terms of a chemical 
formula, as its constitution is very varied. In fact there appears to be 
a group of substances all classed together under the common name of 
proteid, which exhibit very different properties. They all consist of carbon, 
hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulphur; but these elements are not 
always combined together in the same proportions. The variations, how- 
ever, are within limits ; the amount of carbon varies from 51*5% to 54"5%> 



Digitized 



by Google 



PROTOPLASM. 



that of hydrogen from 6-9% to 7*3%, that of nitrogen from 15*2% to 17%, 
that of oxygen from 20-9% to 23*5%, and that of sulphur from 0*3% to 2%. 

Carbohydrates are substances consisting of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, 
the two latter always being present in the proportion in which they occur 
in water (H 2 0). Thus a molecule of starch consists of 6 atoms of carbon, 
10 of hydrogen, and 5 of oxygen (C 6 H 10 5 ). 

Fats also consist of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen ; but there is far more 
hydrogen in proportion to the oxygen than in water. 

The salts vary considerably, both in quantity and in nature, the following 
elements being very frequently found : Potassium, sodium, magnesium, 
iron, and phosphorus. 

It will be observed that out of the various constituents of dead proto- 
plasm, the only one which contains nitrogen is the proteid. 

During the whole of its life, protoplasm is, on the one hand, 
constantly assimilating food, and building itself up ; and, on 
the other hand, as constantly breaking down, and getting rid 
of its waste products. 

Both the foods and the waste products are of less complex 
structure than the protoplasm itself. One of the most im- 
portant food substances is oxygen, and one of the commonest 
waste products is carbon dioxide. This elimination of carbon 
dioxide, as has already been observed, is one of the most 
marked characteristics of protoplasm. 

The life history of protoplasm may be represented by a 
curved line. At the one end are the food substances, on their 
way to form protoplasm ; at the summit is the active living 
protoplasm ; at the other end are the waste products, and the 
dead protoplasm. 

The chemical changes which take place during the life 
history of protoplasm are collectively spoken of as its meta- 
bolism, that is, the changing over from one state to another. 
The building up, synthesis, or assimilation of non-living matter 
is described as its anabolism, and the breaking down of the 
living matter again into dead matter as its katabolism. 



Digitized 



by Google 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



Professor Gaskell considers that the constructive or anabolic process of 
restitution goes on constantly and of itself — *>., without the necessity of 
stimulus ; whereas the katabolic or disruptive process, in which energy is 
discharged, takes place only occasionally, and in obedience to stimulus. 
This theory suggests an alternation of rest with activity, of self-regulative 
construction with stimulated disruption. 

The importance of this liberation of energy during the disruptive process 
cannot be over estimated, for evidence is continually accumulating to show 
that to this process can be ascribed all the so-called vital phenomena ex- 
hibited by the protoplasm, the changes in form, the contractions, the 
streaming movements, etc. ; and this also renders it easy to understand 
the terms excitability or irritability, which have been before made use of. 
The unstable protoplasm is readily affected by external stimuli, that is, the 
disruptive or katabolic process is readily induced, and the changes in form, 
etc., in the protoplasm are but the external manifestations of the processes 
which are taking place within the protoplasm itself. 

If one of the hairs from the base of a stamen of a flower of 
the Tradescantia virginica (Spiderwort) be examined with a 
high power of the microscope, it will be seen to be composed 
of a number of cells. If one of these cells be carefully 
examined, the greater part of it will be seen to consist of a 
violet-coloured transparent fluid, the cell-sap ; but surrounding 
the cell-sap, and hence lining the inside of the cell-wall, 
there is a layer of semi-fluid substance containing numerous 
granules. This granular semi-fluid substance is protoplasm. At 
one part, imbedded in it, a denser body will be seen ; this is 
the nucleus. Occasionally nucleoli may be distinguished in 
the nucleus itself. Threads of protoplasm radiate from the 
nucleus and stretch to the lining of the cell-wall. 

If the protoplasm be closely watched, it will be seen that 
streaming movements are constantly taking place in it, which 
are accompanied by a slow but constant change in the shape of 
the protoplasm itself. Although these movements can only be 
observed in a few cells, it is probable that they occur in all at 
one stage or other of their development. 



Digitized 



by Google 



PROTOPLASM, 



Most animal cells are so closely packed together that they cannot move 
visibly until they are set free. If however a cell of the embryo of the fowl 
or of the frog be set free at a certain stage of its existence, it may be observed 
to change its shape slowly, now protruding one part of its substance and 
now another. 

These movements may, however, be more easily observed in 
the colourless blood corpuscles of the Frog or of Man. They 
are described as amoeboid movements, from their similarity to 
those exhibited by the Amoeba, one of the lowest forms of 
animal life. 




Fig. i.— A cell from a staminal hair of Tradescantia virginica (from Strasburger). 

Although so characteristic of protoplasm, they can, under certain condi- 
tions, be made to occur in non-living matter. Professor Butschli has 
succeeded in inducing movements in droplets of thick olive oil suspended 
in a weak solution of potassium carbonate, which closely resemble the 
movements of the protoplasm in the Amoeba, and under suitable conditions 
these movements may be seen to occur continuously for a considerable 
period of time. 

As these movements of protoplasm form one of the most 
delicate and charcteristic signs of its life, so their cessation 
forms one of the most reliable, and most easily recognisable 
evidences of its death. 

It has already been stated that protoplasm is constantly 
absorbing oxygen, and as constantly eliminating carbon dioxide. 
The two processes are described as the respiration of proto- 
plasm, and as protoplasm occurs in every living cell of both 
plants and animals, it of necessity follows that the processes 
of respiration must go on in every living organism. The 
oxygen may be withheld for a short time without killing the 



Digitized 



by Google 



8 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



protoplasm, which only becomes dormant, and recovers itself 
when the oxygen is again supplied, but, if active protoplasm 
be kept too long without oxygen, it invariably dies. 

This is only the case in protoplasm in which active processes are taking 
place. The protoplasm which is lying quiescent, such as that in seeds, does 
not die, but it requires oxygen as soon as growth commences. 

It is also necessary that the cell should be aole to elimin- 
ate its carbon dioxide. 

Two other conditions are necessary if the living processes of 
protoplasm are to be actively carried on ; namely, that it should 
be able constantly to obtain a sufficiency of water, and that 
the temperature should not fall below 4 C, nor rise above 
40 C. Changes of temperature within these limits affect the 
rapidity of the protoplasmic movements, a rise of temperature 
quickening them, while a fall slackens them. 

Electricity also affects the movements, a weak current caus- 
ing them to increase in rapidity, while a strong one kills the 
protoplasm. Similarly, chemical reagents if very dilute, and 
mechanical stimuli if weak, also excite these movements, whilst 
strong reagents and stimuli cause death in the protoplasm. 

All the movements which a body makes or exhibits are due 
to the action of these stimuli on the protoplasm in the in- 
dividual cells which form the organism. 

Historical. 

Rosel von Rosendorf, in 1755, gave a description of the Amoeba, which 
he called the Proteus Animalcule. He dwelt at some length upon the 
form and movements of what we now call living protoplasm. Later on, 
Robert Brown, Schwann and Schleiden (1 831 —1839) described the structure, 
origin, and functions of the cell substance. Unfortunately, however, they 
retarded rather than advanced our knowledge, for all their descriptions were 
coloured by the theory, since disproved, that the cell-wall is the most 
important part of the cell. 

Dujardin in 1835 described the substance which we now call protoplasm 



Digitized 



by Google 



PROTOPLASM. 



under the name of sarcode, and it was the careful work of this observer 
that first directed enquiry along the lines which it has since followed. 

Hugo von Mohl in 1846, in his description of the vegetable cell, first 
clearly distinguished protoplasm not only from cell-wall but also from cell- 
sap, and it was he who gave to it the name by which it is still known. 
Max Schulze in 186 1 identified the vegetable protoplasm of Mohl with the 
animal sarcode of Dujardin. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER III. 
CELLS. 

LEYDIG defined a cell as " a mass of protoplasm furnished 
with a nucleus. " This definition holds true in the vast 
majority of cases, but it is not universally true, for there are 
a certain number of minute unicellular plants and animals, 
each of which apparently consists of nothing but a single 
droplet of protoplasm, in which, so far, no nucleus has been 




Fig. a.— Immature egg-cell from the ovary of an Echinoderm, showing 
nucleus, nucleolus, and nuclear network (from Hertwig). 

discovered. Almost all plant cells have, moreover, in addition, 
a cell-wall, which surrounds and encloses the protoplasm. 

Many animal cells are also enclosed by a cell-membrane ; 
so that the older definition of a cell " that it consists of a mass 
of protoplasm surrounded by a cell-membrane, and that it 
contains a nucleus/' is true in a large proportion of cases. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CELLS. 



ii 



The cell-membrane or wall is formed by substances which, in 
many cases, are waste products of the protoplasm, deposited 
either in the external layer of the protoplasm or upon the 
outside of it. 



if 



A 



n 



i 







Fig. 3. — Various forms of plant cells (from Prantl). A, the end of a bast fibre 
with strongly thickened pitted walls (longitudinal section) ; B, wood cells, 
surface view and section ; C, part of vessel with bordered pits, cut open at 
the top. At a and b the remains of the absorbed septa are visible. 

The number of cells, in which nuclei have not been discovered, is steadily 
diminishing ; in some cases of cells without nuclei, the nuclear substance 
seems to be diffused through the protoplasm. There is no doubt that the 



Digitized 



by Google 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 



nucleus is a very important part of the cell, but exactly what are its functions 
and relative importance is not yet fully understood. There is no doubt that 
the nucleus plays an important part in cell division, as also in the processes 
of fertilisation. If a cell loses its nucleus it soon dies. The nucleus 
frequently contains within itself one or more minute rounded bodies called 
nucleoli, and a description has been given of a similar smaller body 
within the nucleolus to which the name of endonucleolus has been given. 

Cells vary very considerably in size, some being less than 
FTnnr mcn m diameter, whilst others can be seen with the naked 
eye ; they also differ very much from one another in shape, as 
may be seen from the figures of animal cells in figs. 28 and 30. 

So also very wide differences are met with in the shape of 
the cells in differents parts of a plant, as seen in the figures on 
pp. 7, 11, and 14. 

Every cell has a life history of its own. It increases in size 
until it reaches its adult condition ; later on its activity 
diminishes, and at last it dies or divides. All cells resemble 
each other when they are first formed ; it is only as they increase 
in size and begin to approach maturity that they take on the 
special forms which fit them to carry out their special functions 
in the economy of the plant or animal. As the functions per- 
formed by the cells differ widely from each other, it is only 
to be expected that the mature cells should also differ much 
from each other, and from their own youngest state. 

The protoplasm of the cell until recently was generally considered to be 
completely homogeneous, and although it might sometimes contain watery 
fluid (vacuoles) imbedded in it, yet it was supposed to be entirely devoid 
of structure. This may possibly be true in some cases ; but it is more 
generally true, especially in the case of fixed animal cells, that the proto- 
plasm consists of two parts— a more fluid part, which is clear and homo- 
geneous, and has been called the hyaloplasm ; and a denser, more solid part, 
which forms a network of fibrils, the reticulum or spongioplasm. As a 
rule the older the cell, the greater is the relative amount of reticulum that 
it contains, and conversely the younger the cell, the more of hyaloplasm is 
there in it. The massing together of reticulum at the points where the 



Digitized 



by Google 



CELLS. 13 

fibrils meet, is supposed by some authorities to give the appearance of 
minute granules, which is so constantly seen in protoplasm. 

In cells where no cell-membrane is present, the peripheral 
layer of protoplasm is usually clearer than that in the interior, 
the difference being sufficiently well marked to justify the use 
of the terms ectoplasm and endoplasm, the former being 
applied to the clearer external layer, the latter to the more 
granular internal portion. It is in the endoplasm that foreign 
substances occur, such as granules of proteid or starch, globules 
of fat, crystals of various kinds, pigment granules and globules 
of watery fluid (vacuoles). 

The reticulum forms a sort of framework to support the hyaloplasm. 
The active streaming movements of the protoplasm take place in the 
hyaloplasm. 

Some cells, both animal and vegetable, in which no reticulum has been 
seen, are supposed to consist of hyaloplasm alone ; if that be the case then it 
must be the hyaloplasm which is the essential part of the cell-protoplasm. 



As the form and appearance of the adult animal cell corre- 
spond in the main with the above description of the typical cell, 
whereas that of the adult plant cell differs considerably, I have 
thought it well to give a somewhat detailed account of the 
latter, including the most important facts concerning the 
structure of the cell-wall, the constitution of cell-sap, and the 
special substances contained in the protoplasm of plant cells. 

In the majority of cases, plant cells, especially those of the 
higher plants, are distinguished from animal cells by their 
possessing, a firm, elastic cell-wall, composed of cellulose, a 
substance allied to starch in its chemical structure. In such 
cells, a layer of protoplasm lies in contact with the inner sur- 
face of the wall ; and the nucleus, a more solid rounded body, is 
imbedded in this layer. The space in the centre of the cell, the 
vacuole, is filled with a watery fluid, the cell-sap. Young cells 



Digitized 



by Google 



14 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



contain no vacuoles, the cell-sap being diffused through the 
protoplasm which fills the cell. As the cell develops, the 




Fig. 4.— Parenchyma cells from the cortical layer of the root of Fritillaria imperialis ; 
longitudinal sections. A, very young cells still without cell-sap ; B, older 
cells. The cell-sap s forms separate drops in the protoplasm p ; C, still older 
cells'; 'A, cell-wall ; k t nucleus (after Sachs). 

cell-sap collects in small drops at different parts of the cell ; as 
these drops increase in size, they coalesce, and at the same 
time the bands of protoplasm which separate them become 
absorbed into the peripheral layer. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CELLS. 15 

It is important to remember that the essential parts of the 
cell are the protoplasm and the nucleus ; the cell-sap and the 
cell-wall are both products of the activity of this substance. 

As the cell-wall grows its chemical composition frequently 
changes more or less, the three most important changes being 
(1) into wood, (2) into cork, and (3) into mucilage. The 
wood, such as that composing the stems of the forest trees, 
is easily permeated by water ; the cork, which forms the bark 
of the trees, is elastic and not easily permeated by water, whilst 
the mucilage is formed by the cell-wall swelling up very con- 
siderably in water and becoming soft and gelatinous. This is 
well seen in some seaweeds. 

Mineral matters sometimes occur in large quantities in the 
walls of cells. The commonest of these are silica and calcium 
carbonate. Silica is present in considerable quantities in such 
rigid structures as stems of grasses and in the leaves of the 
beech. 

Cell-sap. — The cell-sap, which saturates the whole of the 
cell-wall and protoplasm and which fills the vacuoles, consists of 
a solution of various substances formed by the activity of the 
protoplasm, such as sugar, soluble salts, vegetable acids, and 
colouring matters. The colours of many flowers are due to 
these colouring matters in the cell-sap. The soluble salts are 
often crystallised out from the cell- sap in the cavity or the wall 
of the cell. 

Substances contained in the protoplasm. — The most im- 
portant substances found in protoplasm, and which are formed 
by the activity of this substance, are chlorophyll, crystalloids, 
aleurone grains, fat, and starch. 

The green colour of most parts of the higher plants is due 
to the presence of chlorophyll corpuscles in the cells. A 
chlorophyll corpuscle is a small mass of specialised protoplasm. 



Digitized 



by Google 



i6 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



It consists of a colourless ground substance, through which is 
diffused a small quantity of a green colouring matter called 
chlorophyll, which is soluble in alcohol. 

In some of the lower plants the chlorophyll does not occur 
in special corpuscles, but is diffused through the whole of the 
protoplasm. In others the protoplasm which contains the 
chlorophyll occurs in the form of spiral bands. 

The chlorophyll corpuscles grow in the manner characteristic 
of living substances, that is, by the intussusception of new 




Fig. 5.— Spirogyra (from Strasburger). A cell of a thread showing chlorophyll- 
bands, pyre no ids, and nucleus with its suspending threads. 

matter, the new particles being deposited amongst those already 
present. They multiply by each corpuscle dividing into two. 

For the development of the green colouring matter light is 
essential ; if a plant be grown in darkness, the corpuscles will 
be formed, but they will not be green. It is also necessary for 
the formation of chlorophyll that the plant should be supplied 
with iron. 

In some plants, as in the Bladder wrack, the green colour is obscured by 
the presence of a differently coloured cell-sap. If this sap be dissolved out 
by soaking the plant for a considerable time in cold fresh water, the green 
colour may be brought into view. 

Other colouring matters occur in the cell-saps of various coloured plants: 
the red colouring matter is phycoerythrin, the olive green is phycophaein, 
and the bluish green phycocyan. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CELLS. 17 

The composition of chlorophyll is unknown, except that it is an iron- 
containing substance. 

Many plants turn brown or yellow in the autumn. This change of colour 
is caused by most of the chlorophyll granules becoming dissolved and the 
remaining ones turning yellow. 

When fruits ripen, changes take place in the chlorophyll, the green 
colouring matter frequently becoming first yellow and then red, while the 
form of the corpuscle becomes altered. The yellow colour of many flowers, 
as, for instance, that of the Dandelion, is due to the presence of protoplasmic 
bodies containing a yellow colouring matter closely allied to chlorophyll. 
The colour of the Virginian creeper at the end of summer is due to the 
presence of other colouring matters in the cell-sap. 

Chlorophyll is of the utmost importance for the nutrition of 
the plant, for by its help in a way not altogether understood, 
the carbon of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is made to 
combine with water to form starch (C 6 Hi 5 ) which can then 
be either used up immediately as a food substance or may be 
stored up for future use in some reservoir. This process can 
only take place in the presence of sunlight. If a green plant 
be exposed to the sun for a short time, more starch will be 
formed than is required for immediate consumption. This may 
be demonstrated by staining a small portion with iodine and 
examining it under the microscope ; the starch grains will be 
turned blue by the iodine, and may thus be easily distinguished. 

Chlorophyll, though chiefly occurring in plants, is not restricted to them. 
It also occurs in some animals, where it performs the same function as it 
does in plants. Thus it is found in some low worms, in one of which no 
mouth or alimentary canal is present, and the whole of the carbon required 
by the worm is probably obtained from the C0 2 dissolved in the water in 
which the animal lives. It is also found in the cells lining the alimentary 
canal of the Hydra viridis. It has been lately shown that in some cases the 
so-called chlorophyll corpuscles are in reality Algae, which live in a 
mutually helpful partnership with the animal, furnishing it with oxygen and 
starch, and in return obtaining nitrogenous nourishment from it. Such a 
partnership is described as symbiosis. 

7 



Digitized 



by Google 



i8 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

Starch occurs imbedded in the protoplasm in the cells of most 
plants at some period of their existence. The starch granule is 
a transparent body, having at one part a black spot, called the 
hilum which is encircled by concentric lines or striae. It consists 
of two substances — starch cellulose which forms the skeleton of 
the grain and which is unattacked by dilute acids, and starch 
granulose which is readily dissolved by them. The starch 




Fig. 6.— Separate chlorophyll-corpuscles with starchy contents from the leaf of 
Funaria hygrometrica (after Sachs), a, a young corpuscle ; b t an older one ; 
b' and b" have begun to divide ; c, d t e, older corpuscles with starchy contents ; 
/and g f after maceration in water by which the substance of the corpuscle has 
been destroyed and only the starchy contents remain. 

granule grows in the same way as the chlorophyll corpuscle 
and the cell-wall, i.e. by the intussusception of new matter. 
Iodine colours the starch granulose blue, but the starch cellulose 
is coloured brown by this reagent. 

The tubers of the potato and the seeds of cereals and 
leguminous plants are especially rich in starch granules. 

Crystalloids are small masses of protoplasm, which assume a crystalline 
form, but possess none of the characteristics of true crystals. 

Aleurone grains, or as they have also been called proteid grains, are 
granules of modified protoplasm, which sometimes occur alone, but very 
frequently surround the crystalloids. 

Crystals of calcium oxalate, or calcium carbonate, occur very frequently 
in plant cells. They have crystallised out of the cell-sap, this being the 
method adopted by the protoplasm of getting rid of its excess of calcium. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CELLS. 19 

Fat globules occur in considerable numbers in some seeds, and they may 
apparently take the place of starch in the chlorophyll corpuscles ; in these 
cases one must suppose that the carbon has been assimilated and fixed in 
the form of fat instead of starch. 

Historical. 

Hooke, in 1665, used the term cell, but in an indefinite way. Leeuwenhoek, 
in 1674, first described unicellular organisms. Fontana discovered the 
nucleolus in 1784; but it was not until Bichat, in 1801, published his 
" Anatomie Ge^rale," that the idea of the whole body being made up of 
cells was advanced. In 1838 Schwann and Schleiden showed that most 
plants and animals are built up of cells, and develop from cells. Goodsir 
in 1845, and Virchow in 1858, proved that in every case cells arise from 
pre-existing cells. Omnis cellula e cellula. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 
CELL DIVISION. 

THE division of the cell into two new ones, similar in all 
respects to the original one and to each other, has 
been studied with great care in a large number of different 
cells of both plants and animals. As the result of these in- 
vestigations, it has been found (i) that there is a striking 
similarity in the mode of division in almost all cases, and 
{2) that the nucleus plays an essential part in the process.* 

The various changes which take place in the nucleus 
axe described as karyokinesis (icdpvov = a kernel or nucleus ; 
KLvrja-Ls = a movement). Fig. 7 gives a drawing of nuclear 
division in a plant cell. 

The resting nucleus can be seen to consist of a network of 
filaments which are readily affected by staining reagents, and 
are called chromatin threads, the remaining part, which does not 
easily become stained, being called the achromatin substance. 
When division is about to take place, the chromatin threads 
acquire the appearance of a coil ; this is called the " coil stage." 
The next change is that the threads divide ; as they do so they 
take up a longitudinal direction, and appear as a series of 

* In some cells it seems probable that a simple, so-called direct mode of 
division occurs. This " direct " form of division is stated to occur in some 
Protozoa and in some cells of higher animals. The division by karyokinesis 
is described as the indirect mode of division. 



Digitized 



by Google 




Jt I 

Fig. 7-— Division of the pollen mother cells of Fritillaria Persica (from Strasburger). 
a, the "coil stage"; b. the segments in course of longitudinal division; c, the 
nuclear spindle in profile ; d, seen from the pole ; e, division of the nuclear plate ; 
y, separation of the daughter segments ; g, formation of daughter coils and of the 
cell plate ; h, course of the nuclear threads in the daughter nuclei ; i, longitudinal 
elongation and formation of loops ; k, nuclear spindle, to the right seen in profile, 
to the left from the pole : /, separation of the daughter segments ; nt f granddaughter 
coils and formation of the cell plates. 



Digitized 



by Google 



22 ELEMENTAR Y BIO LOG K 

loops (fig. 7 e) arranged in a star-like form ; at the same time 
two " central corpuscles " appear in the protoplasm at opposite 
poles of the cell. From these, fine achromatin threads radiate 
to the chromatin loops. This is described as the aster stage. 
The next stage is characterised by the longitudinal division of 
the loops ; each half separates from the other, and is drawn in 
the direction of the central corpuscles, and hence away from 
the other half (fig. 7/). The result of this is, that two stars 
are formed, slightly separated from each other (diaster stage). 
Meanwhile the cell substance has divided into two, and the 
threads in each star assume the form of a coil, resembling the 
original coil of the complete nucleus. 

The division is then complete (fig. jg). Each coil now be- 
comes a "resting nucleus," and is ready to again undergo 
division after an interval of rest. 

To recapitulate — 

1. The nucleus, to begin with, is in the resting stage. 

2. It then takes up the coil-like form of the coil stage. 

3. The two central corpuscles appear at opposite poles of 
the cell in the cell-protoplasm. 

4. The coil stage passes into the aster stage. 

5. Division takes place, so that the diaster stage is 
reached. 

6. The cell-protoplasm divides. 

7. Each nucleus again becomes a coil. 

8. Each coil becomes a resting nucleus. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER V. 

REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT. 

EVERY organism, however complicated, whether it be 
plant or animal, originally consisted of a single cell, 
and all the changes which go on during development, by which 
the young organism comes more and more to resemble the 
parent, are changes which started with the division of the single 
cell into two, the two cells thus formed into four, and so on. This 
division of the cell is termed segmentation, and is usually 
started by the process of fertilisation. 

Sometimes, however, segmentation starts spontaneously, or rather as 
the result, either of the influence upon the cell of its surroundings, or of 
internal changes. The excessive growth of the cell, as in the Amoeba, may 
produce an organism so unwieldy, that the vital processes cannot be 
efficiently performed. In some animals, although fertilisation is the rule, 
yet sometimes the egg cell develops without having been fertilised, that is 
parthenogenetically. In bees, for instance, whilst the fertilised eggs develop 
into queen bees and working bees, the unfertilised eggs give rise by 
parthenogenesis to drones. 

In all the higher forms, and in most of the lower ones, the 
germ cell or ovum begins to segment as the result of a process 
of fertilisation, which will now be described. 

In some animals, such as the Leech, at a very early stage in development, 
a certain number of cells are differentiated off for the purposes of reproduc- 
tion, and it is these cells and these alone that are concerned in reproducing 

23 



Digitized 



by Google 



24 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

the species, that is in giving birth to new animals similar to the parent. In 
such animals it is easy to make out that the reproductive cells, the so-called 
germ cells, are set apart before much differentiation of labour has taken 
place in the collection of cells forming the young animal, and that therefore 
these cells are very similar to the original one from which the organism has 
been derived. In most animals, however, including the higher vertebrates, 
these germ cells are not differentiatedoff from the other cells until pretty late 
in development, and then it is not so easy to realise that they retain many 
of the characteristics of the original cell. In other words, the continuity of 
germ cells is demonstrable in some animals, but not in most. Weissman 
considers, however, that in all animals there is a special part of the nucleus 
of the egg cell, which he calls the Keimplasma, which is not used up in 
building up the body of the offspring, but is set apart for the purpose of 




Fig. 8.— Immature egg-cell from the ovary of an Echinoderm. The large germinal 
vesicle (nucleus) shows a germinal spot (nucleolus), in a network of filaments, 
the nuclear network (after Hertwig). 

forming the germ cells, which will give rise to the next generation. 
According to this view therefore there is not a continuity of cells through- 
out the history of the race, but there is a continuity of protoplasm. 

The ovum is a typical animal cell consisting of protoplasm, a 
more or less well-defined cell-membrane, a nucleus (the germinal 
vesicle), and a nucleolus (a germinal spot). 

When the ovum is fully mature it usually breaks away from 
the ovary, and certain changes take place in its nucleus. 
The nucleus moves to the surface and divides, one half remain- 
ing within the cell, but the other half being extruded. The 



Digitized 



by Google 



REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT. 25 

lialf nucleus within the cell again divides and pushes out 
another quarter of the original nucleus, so that the egg cell 
only retains a quarter of the original nucleus within its pro- 
toplasm; the remaining three quarters linger for a time 
adherent to the outer surface of the ovum, but ultimately 
they disappear. The extruded portions are called polar bodies, 
or polar vesicles. The part of the nucleus left in the cell is 
now called the female pronucleus. 




Fig. 9.— Formation of the polar bodies in Asterias facialis. s/>, spindle ; rk\ first 
polar vesicle ; rk* t second polar vesicle ; ek, female pronucleus (from Hertwig). 

The spermatozoon or male element is also a cell, but it does 
not correspond to the egg cell before it has extruded its polar 
bodies. 

The sperm mother cell from which numerous spermatozoa 
arise is the homologue of the ovum. 

It divides into numerous sperm daughter cells, but only a 
portion of the protoplasm takes part in the division, the re- 
mainder persisting as an inert mass, around which the daughter 
cells are grouped. Each daughter cell consists of a large well- 
developed nucleus, around which there is a delicate covering of 
protoplasm, the latter being also usually produced into a long 



Digitized 



by Google 



26 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



vibratile tail. The daughter cells, or as they are now called the 
spermatozoa, drop off from the inert mass of protoplasm, and 
when brought into the neighbourhood of the ovum by means 
of their motile tails, they swim up to it, and one of them 
succeeds in forcing its way into it. 




Fig. io.— Spermatozoa (from Claus). a, of Medusa ; b, of a Nematode ; c, of a 
Crab ; d, of a Torpedo ; e, of a Salamander ; /, of a Frog ; g, of a Monkey. 

In some cases, the above history is modified. In these the sperm mother 
cell divides repeatedly, forming a group of small cells, each of which 
elongates, the nucleus taking up its position at one end, and from the other 
a delicate filament growing out. The bulk of the protoplasm then collects 
as a swelling upon the filament or tail, and after a time becomes completely 
detached from the now fully developed spermatozoon. In both cases the 
result is the same, namely that the sperm cell gets rid of a good deal of its 
protoplasm before it is ready to fertilise the egg cell. 



Digitized 



by Google 



REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT, 



27 



The ovum ceases to be receptive as soon as a spermatozoon 
has entered it, so that any others that may reach it are not 
allowed to get in. For a short time the head of the spermato- 
zoon lies inside the ovum while its tail still dangles outside, 





Fig. 11.— a, young ova of a Medusa, b, mother-cells of spermatozoa of a Vertebrate 
one of them showed Amoeboid movements (from Claus). 

but presently the head loses its tail and protoplasmic covering. 
It then consists only of nuclear substance, and is called the 
male pronucleus. The male pronucleus now approaches 
and eventually fuses with the female pronucleus, so that the 





ntS: 



Fig. 12. Fig. 13. 

Fig. 12.— Fertilised egg of a Sea-urchin. The head of the spermatozoon, which 
has penetrated, has been converted into a male pronucleus (m) surrounded by 
a protoplasmic radiation, and has approached the female pronucleus (/) 
(from Hertwig). 

Fig. 13.— Egg of a Sea-urchin immediately after the close of fertilisation. The 
male and female pronuclei have united to form the nucleus (n) of the fertilised 
egg cell, which occupies the centre of a protoplasmic radiation (from Hertwig). 

fertilised egg cell, with a nucleus derived from the union of the 
two pronuclei forms a perfect cell. It frequently contains a 
considerable amount of food substance or yolk. 

It is interesting to notice, that the changes that take place 



Digitized 



by Google 



28 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



before fertilisation in the female cell, result in the formation 
of a cell deficient in nuclear substance, whereas those which 
occur in the formation of the spermatozoon, produce a cell 
deficient in protoplasmic substance. As soon as the egg 
cell is fertilised, segmentation begins, the single cell divides 
into two cells, each of these again divides, so that four cells axe 
formed, the four divide into eight, the eight produce sixteen, 
the sixteen thirty-two, the thirty-two sixty-four, and so on. 

The appearance produced in the egg by this segmentation 
varies considerably in different cases, the differences being 






Fig. 14.— Unequal segmentation of the Frog's egg (after Ecker) in ten successive 
stages. 

chiefly due to the varying amounts of food substance (yolk) 
present. If there be very little, the cells will be of equal size, 
as in fig. 17. If there is a moderate quantity, they will be 
unequal, as the food, as a rule, is chiefly collected in the 
lower cells; these are generally large and unwieldy, so that 
division does not take place as rapidly in them as in the 
smaller upper cells. 

If the food substance be present in so great a quantity that 
the protoplasm of the egg cell with its nucleus is relegated to 
one pole of the cell, then when segmentation takes place the 
protoplasm and nucleus divide, while the inert yolk has too 



Digitized 



by Google 



REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT. 29 

little vitality to participate in this process. The result of this 
is, that active division only takes place over a small area at 
one pole of the egg, and that the numerous cells produced by 
this division are collected in the form pf a disc or button 
resting upon the undivided yolk. This partial (meroblastic) 
segmentation, which is well seen in the Hen's egg, occurs fre- 
quently in the ova of vertebrates, occurring in Birds, Reptiles, 
many Fishes, and a few Mammals. 

When the segmentation is complete, it is said to be holo- 
blastic. As the result of complete (holoblastic) segmentation, a 




Fig. 15.— Diagram of an egg with the nutritive yolk in a polar position ; gd, germ 
disc of protoplasm ; «, nucleus ; y> nutritive yolk (after Hertwig). 

mulberry-like mass of cells is formed, which is sometimes solid 
(the solid morula), but more often is hollow (the hollow morula). 
In the latter case the cells are arranged in the form of a 
hollow sphere (the blastula), the cavity enclosed by them being 
called the segmentation or cleavage cavity. In an egg, which 
contains a good deal of yolk, not sufficient to prevent complete 
segmentation, but enough to swell up the cells, the segmenta- 
tion cavity will be comparatively small, as seen in fig. 18. 

As segmentation proceeds, the upper cells divide rather 
more rapidly than the lower; the result of this is that the 
lower cells become slightly pushed into the segmentation 



Digitized 



by Google 



3° 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



cavity. This position having once been taken up by the 
lower cells, the more they multiply the farther do they grow 
in, and the more reduced in size does the segmentation cavity 
become, until at last the cells, which were at the lower pole of 
the hollow sphere now come to lie underneath the upper cells. 
This process of pushing or growing in is described as invagina- 




Fig. 16.— Segmentation of the germinal disc of a Hen's egg, surface view (after 
KOlliker). A, germinal disc with the first vertical furrow ; B, the same with 
two vertical furrows crossing one another at right angles ; C and Z>, more 
advanced stages. 

tion, and the resulting two-layered sac is described as the 
gastmla or diblastula condition of the embryo. This process is 
well seen in the egg of the Amphioxus, one of the lowest of 
the Vertebrates (fig. 19). 

The outer layer of the diblastula is called the epiblast or 
ectoderm, the inner being termed the hypoblast or endoderm. 
The opening, by which the cavity of the sac communicates with 



Digitized 



by Google 



REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT. 



3i 



the exterior, that is to say, the mouth of the sac, is called the 
blastopore, the cavity itself being described as the archenteron, 




Fig. 17.— Blastula of Amphioxus (after Hatschek). sc, segmentation cavity ; uc, 
upper cells ; Ic, lower cells. 

as from it the larger part of the enteron or alimentary canal 
is formed. 




Fig. 18.— Blastula of Triton taeniatus (from Hertwig). sc, segmentation cavity ; 
ntz, marginal zone ; yc, cells with abundant yolk. 

In an egg, like that of the Chick, where the segmenting 
protoplasm and nucleus are confined to one pole, the resulting 



Digitized 



by Google 



32 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



segmented disc is described as the blastodermic area, the 
germinal disc, or simply the blastoderm. 




Fig. ig,—A, blastosphere (blastula) of Amphioxus ; B, invagination of the same ; 
C, gastrula (diblastula) invagination completed ; O, blastopore (after Hatschek). 

This blastoderm, however, is not solid, but forms a disc 
similar to that which would be produced by two very shallow 




Fig. 20. — Diagrammatic longitudinal section through an undeveloped Hen's egg 
(after Allen Thompson). Bl, germinal disc ; GD, yellow yolk ; WD, white yolk ; 
DM, vitelline membrane; EW, albumen; Ch, chalazae ; S, shell membrane; 
KS, Calcareous shell ; LR, air chamber. 

watch glasses, so placed as to enclose a shallow cavity. The 
upper layer is composed of comparatively small cells, and is 
continuous at its margin with the lower layer, which consists of 



Digitized 



by Google 



REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT. 



33 



larger ones. These are only imperfectly separated off from the 
yolk, on which they rest. The cavity between the two layers 
is the cleavage or segmentation cavity. 



lc uc 




Fig. 2i.— Section through the germ disc of a Hen's egg (after Duval), sc, segmen 
tation cavity ; ivy, white yolk ; Ic, lower cell layer ; uc, upper cell layer. 

As Duval has recently shown, at one margin of the blastoder- 
mic area there is a slight infolding and a growth inwards of 
the cells of the lower layer, the result of which is, that a cavity 



pi al a 



wy 



yn 



y* 




Fig. 22.— Longitudinal section through the germ-disc of a Finch (Carduelis spinus) 
(after Duval), o, outer germ layer ; i, inner germ layer ; wy, white yolk ; 
yn, yolk nuclei ; a, archenteron ; al, anterior lip of blastopore ; pi, posterior 
lip of blastopore. 

occurs between the lower layer of cells forming the disc and 
the yolk. This space is the archenteron, the entrance to it 
being the blastopore. The cells which have grown inwards, 
together with those of the lower layer, are hypoblastic, and form 

3 



Digitized 



by Google 



34 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

the roof of the archenteron. The hypoblast or endoderm lies 
immediately beneath the original upper layer, which is the 
epiblast or ectoderm. At a later period, the lateral margins of 
the hypoblast grow round to partially enclose the cavity, with 
the result, that the blastopore, which was at first transverse, 
becomes bent into what appears on a surface view to be a short 
longitudinal depression, and to this the name primitive streak 
was given, before its true meaning was understood. 




Fig. 23.— Surface view of the area pellucida in the blastoderm of a Chick, soon 
after the formation of the primitive groove (after Balfour), pr, primitive 
streak with primitive groove ; a/ t amniotic fold. 

We thus see, that in an egg loaded with food yolk, essentially 
the same changes take place as in the egg of the Amphioxus, 
and with the same result, that a gastrula is produced with its 
two layers (epiblast and hypoblast) and its cavity (the archen- 
teron) opening to the exterior by a slit-like aperture (the 
blastopore). It will be noticed by a reference to fig. 22, that 
the hypoblast is more than one layer of cells in thickness, and 
that it does not completely surround the archenteron, the 
unenclosed side being composed of yolk. 



Digitized 



by Google 



REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT. 



35 



During incubation, the yolk immediately under the germinal 
disc liquefies, the disc itself floating on the liquid, with the result 
that on a surface view this area appears pellucid, and is called 
the area pellucida, whilst the margin of the disc rests on the 
solid yolk, and has therefore an opaque appearance, being 
called the area opaca. The germinal disc slowly grows out 
over the yolk, but it is only the central part of it lying in the 
area pellucida that forms the embryo, and it is in the posterior 




Fig. 24.— Optical sections of a Rabbit's egg in two stages immediately following 
segmentation (after Ed. v. Beneden). A, solid cell mass resulting from 
segmentation ; B, development of the blastula by the formation of a cleavage 
cavity in the cell mass ; ep> outer layer of cells ; hy> central plug of cells'; 
dp, place where solid plug of cells has grown into the cavity. 

part of this region that the growth inwards, with the consequent 
formation of the archenteron and the production of the two- 
layered or gastrula condition, takes place. 

In Mammals, the way in which the two-layered sac is formed 
diners somewhat from that described in the chick. The egg 
contains very little food yolk, hence segmentation is complete 
and equal, a hollow sphere of cells being formed. In the 
rabbit's egg a solid plug of cells is very soon seen to 
grow into the cavity. 



Digitized 



by Google 



36 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



This looks as though the gastrula were going to be formed, 
but this is not the case. A large amount of albuminous fluid 
collects in the remains of the cavity, with the result, that the 
solid plug becomes spread out at one part of the egg as a layer 
underneath the cells forming the sphere. 

At this stage, the mammalian egg is very similar to the egg 
of the Chick. The albuminous fluid represents the yolk, and 




Fig. 25.— Rabbit's egg 70-90 hours alter fertilisation (after Ed. v. Benedenj. 
bv, cavity of the blastula ; zp, gelatinous layer surrounding the blastula ; 
ep t outer layer of cells ; hy, spread-out central plug of cells. 

the spread-out cells at the upper part, together with the cells 
covering them, form the blastodermic area. The chief 
differences between the two eggs is that the rabbit's egg is 
exceedingly small, only being one millimetre in diameter, and 
the albuminous fluid corresponding to the yolk in the hen's 
egg is surrounded by a layer of cells. The surrounding layer 
of cells has been called the epiblast, and the spread-out plug 
the hypoblast, but there seems to be very little doubt, that 



Digitized 



by Google 



REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT. 37 

these names have been incorrectly applied, and that it is only 
from the mass of cells described above as the blastodermic 
area that the hypoblast and epiblast are formed. The way in 
which the further changes take place is very uncertain, but it is 
probable that they are similar to the changes above described 
as occurring in the hen's egg. Whether this be so or not, the 
result is the same ; that is, a germ disc is produced which 
shows on surface view a primitive streak, representing the 
blastopore, and on section an outer germ layer or epiblast and 
an inner germ layer or hypoblast. 

We have now followed out three modes of development of 
the two germ layers (epiblast and hypoblast) which at first sight 
seem to be very different, but when compared are seen all to . 
consist of essentially the same processes. As the result of 
segmentation, a one-layered sac or blastula is produced which 
by the ingrowth or invagination and the multiplication of some 
of the cells composing it, forms a two-layered sac or gastrula, 
the sac being incomplete in the Chick and Mammal, but com- 
plete in Amphioxus, and in all of them having an opening at 
one part of it, the blastopore. The typical or normal course 
of events is that seen in the Amphioxus, and the course of 
development up to the diblastula stage, in all animals more or 
less closely corresponds to this type. 

The next stage in development is marked by the formation 
from one or both of the primary layers (epiblast and hypoblast) 
of a third layer, the mesoblast. In the Amphioxus, the meso- 
blast is derived entirely from hypoblast, arising, as a series of 
segments, on either side of the embryo from the hypoblastic 
walls of the archenteron. Each of these segments contains 
within it a cavity, which enlarges to form the ccelom or body 
cavity. 

We thus see in this case that the archenteron, or as it has 



Digitized 



by Google 



38 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



been called ccelenteron, becomes divided into two parts — a 
mesenteron which forms the alimentary canal, and a ccelom 
or body cavity. 

The^same arrangement occurs in other Vertebrates, only the 
mesoblast is given off as two solid masses of cells from the 
hypoblast, at first in the region of the primitive streak (blasto- 
pore), ilater along the roof of the archenteron. These solid 
masses grow downwards towards the ventral region, and later 

ISppSiZ?^^: "* 

"") ft *£l^^BNis£ € P 




- pm 
••pm 
-/iy 



cce ' 

~ m • vm 
al ' 

y * ™ 

yn 



Fig. 26.— Diagram to show the development of the middle germ-layers and the 
body cavity in Vertebrata (from Hertwig). mp, medullary plate ; ch, cells 
from which the notochord is developed ; ep, epiblast ; hy, hypoblast ; pnt, 
parietal layer, and vm, visceral layer of the mesoblast ; y, yolk mass ; yn, yolk 
nuclei ; al, alimentary canal ; cce, ccelom (body cavity). 

on split into two' layers, one of which lines the epiblast and is 
called the somatopleuric layer of the mesoblast or somatopleure, 
while the other covers the hypoblast and is called the splanch- 
nopleuric layer of the mesoblast or splanchnopleure. 

From these three layers of the embryo, the epiblast (external 
layer), hypoblast (internal layer), and mesoblast (middle layer), 
all the complicated structures of the adult are developed. 

The epiblast gives rise to the epidermis with its outgrowths 
of hairs, nails, etc., to the nervous system, to the essential 



Digitized 



by Google 



REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT. 



39 



parts of the sense organs, to the excretory duct of the renal 
organs, and to the lining of the mouth or stomatodceum, and of 
the posterior end of the alimentary canal or proctodceum. 

The hypoblast gives rise to the lining of the alimentary 
canal, except of the entrance and exit, and to the epithelial 
cell-lining of the lungs, and of the digestive glands (liver, 
pancreas, etc.). 

The mesoblast gives rise to all the other structures of the 




Fig. 27.— Diagrammatic view of the alimentary canal of a Chick on the fourth day 
(after Goette). The heavy line indicates the inner germ-layer (hypoblast), 
the shaded portion surrounding it the splanchnic portion of the mesoblast. 
lg> lung ; sty stomach ; p, pancreas ; /, liver. 

body, i.e. the muscles, the connective tissue, the bone and 
cartilage, the renal organs, and probably the vascular system, 
and in relation with it, is developed the reproductive system. 

Generally animals in their development follow the course which has been 
marked out in the evolution of the animals below them ; thus, a Worm at 
the commencement of its development is unicellular, and is similar to an 
Amoeba, and when it has developed to the gastrula stage, it is very like 
a young Hydra. This law has been shortly stated in the sentence, " the 
development of the individual is a shortened recapitulation of the evolution 
of the race.' , 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 
TISSUES. 

AS we have seen, a single cell is capable of performing all 
the functions which are necessary for the maintenance 
of life, and for the reproduction of the species. The Amoeba 
is a complete animal capable of leading an independent ex- 
istence; so also Protococcus is a plant complete in itself, 
maintaining its own life, and giving rise to new plants to per- 
petuate its species. Hence, at first sight, it seems unnecessary 
that any animal or plant should consist of more than a single 
cell ; but from a study of these unicellular forms, we have seen 
that though they are capable of doing everything necessary for 
the maintenance of life, yet they can only perform each func- 
tion to a limited degree. The capacity of the Amoeba for 
development is limited by the very multiplicity of the functions 
it has to perform ; it has reached a stage where, if any further 
development is to take place, it must get rid of some of its 
functions so as to allow it to develop those that remain to it 
more thoroughly. If two Amoebae were to join together, and 
one of them, for instance, were to limit itself to catching food, 
whilst the other digested it, it is evident that both Amoebae 
would derive much benefit from the partnership. Again, if the 
separate members of a colony, composed of many Amoebae, 
were to become so intimately connected together that there 
could be a thorough division of labour, — one group being told 



Digitized 



by Google 



T/SSC/ES. 41 



off to catch food for the colony, a second group to digest it, a 
third group to get rid of waste products, a fourth group to 
reproduce the species, and so on — the colony would be capable 
of performing the functions necessary for the maintenance of 
life much more thoroughly than a single Amoeba possibly 
can. This division of labour, this differentiation of different 
groups to perform special functions, would be manifestly of the 
greatest advantage to the colony as a whole and also to every 
individual in the colony. 

Every higher animal may be regarded as a colony of uni- 
cellular animals, and every higher plant as a colony of unicellular 
plants, in which this division of labour has taken place. The 
higher the animal or plant, the greater will be the division of 
labour ; that is to say, the more completely will the different 
cells be separated into groups with different functions. 

Again, the more specialised a cell becomes, that is, the more 
it becomes limited to the special work for which it has been 
told off, the more will its shape and character differ from the 
cell which has to perform all functions, and the more rigid 
and unchangeable will it be. Further, each group will consist 
of a collection of cells having a like and common function, and 
therefore the separate cells of the group will be all, more or 
less, alike. Such a group of similar cells, having a common 
function, is described as a tissue. 

It must not, however, be considered that an organ such as 
a muscle consists of only one tissue. The function of a muscle 
is to contract and so to approximate the parts to which its ends 
are attached. In order to perform this function, nearly all the 
cells of which it is composed have been specialised to contract 
when stimulated, but these actively contractile cells require to 
be supported and connected together by a framework of 
modified cells. Hence we see that a muscle must consist of 



Digitized 



by Google 



42 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

two forms of tissue, the contractile tissue and the framework 
tissue, the latter being described as connective tissue. 

In addition to these tissues, there are in themuscle, blood- 
vessels to supply it with nourishment, lymphatics to drain the 
tissues of the fluid which has escaped from the blood-vessels, 
and nerves to convey stimuli to the muscle and sensations 
away from it ; and each of these structures is made up of more 
than one kind of tissue. 

In the same way we find that a green leaf is made up of 
several different tissues. The main mass of the leaf consists 
of chlorophyll-containing cells with large intercellular spaces 
between them; the outer wall of the leaf is made up of 
epidermal cells, whose function is mainly protective ; and run- 
ning in the leaf are fibrovascular bundles which contain 
various kinds of cells, some of which form a supporting tissue, 
others are modified to form vessels which convey water and 
nourishment to the leaf, and so on. 

We thus see that in both plants and animals each organ is 
made up of several tissues, but we generally find that one of 
these tissues is the important one for that special organ, the 
rest being only present to enable the important tissue to 
perform its functions under the best possible conditions. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER VII. 
ANIMAL TISSUES. 

STRICTLY speaking there are as many tissues in the body 
as there are groups of cells performing different functions, 
but since many of the groups, although performing different 
functions, have similar anatomical characteristics, all the tissues 
of the body are grouped together into only a few classes. 

In animals the chief anatomical differences presented by the 
various groups of tissues from each other, depend not so much 
upon the characters of the cells themselves, as upon the amount 
and character of the substance which surrounds them and 
therefore separates them from each other. This substance is 
a product of the activity of the protoplasm of the cells, and is 
described as intercellular substance ; if it is present in any 
considerable quantity, the tissue has the appearance of a matrix 
of intercellular substance in which the cells are imbedded. 
The elementary tissues in the animal body are — 
Epithelial tissue. Bone. 

Connective tissue. Muscular tissue. 

Cartilage. Nervous tissue. 

In some cases, tissues which at first sight appear to be dis- 
tinct, are yet found to have so much in common in their 
structure and origin that they can be classed under one of the 
above headings. 
Epithelial tissues are characterised by the small amount of 



Digitized 



by Google 



44 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



intercellular substance that they contain, the epithelial cells 
appearing to form continuous masses. Frequently the inter- 
cellular substance is present in so small a quantity, as only to 
become apparent after careful staining with nitrate of silver or 
some other special reagent. Epithelial tissues occur (i) on 
the surface of the skin, and on the lining of all the ducts and 
recesses of the glands which open on to the surface of the 
skin ; (2) on the lining membrane of the alimentary canal and 
of all the ducts and glandular recesses which are connected 




Fig. 28.— Various kinds of epithelial cells (from Claus). a, flat cells ; b, flat cells 
with flagella (from a Medusa) ; c, columnar cells ; d, ciliated cell ; e, flagellate 
cell with collar (from a Sponge) ; /, columnar cells with porous borders 
(intestinal epithelium). 

with the alimentary canal ; (3) on the lining of the respiratory, 
urinary and genital passages ; (4) on the inner or free surface 
of closed cavities, such as the various portions of the body- 
cavity > (5) on the inner surface of the cavities of the heart, 
blood vessels, and lymphatics. 

Epithelial cells vary considerably in shape according to the 
different functions they have to perform. Thus on the surface 
of the skin they are flattened, whilst in the alimentary canal 



Digitized 



by Google 



ANIMAL TISSUES. 



45 



they are elongated and are arranged side by side like so many 
columns {columnar epithelium). Sometimes they are " ciliated," 
that is to say their free surface is drawn out into numerous fine 
threads of protoplasm ; sometimes they are arranged in a 
single layer; sometimes as on the skin there are several 
layers, forming a stratified epithelium. Hairs, nails, claws, 
and feathers all consist of modified epithelial tissue. 

Connective tissues, Cartilage, and Bone may all be considered 
together, as they possess very many points in common. They 




Fig. 29.— White fibrous connective tissue (from Claus). 

are all developed from the middle layer of the embryo, they 
all serve to support or connect other tissues, and further they 
are capable of replacing each other in different classes of 
animals. Thus in the lowest Vertebrates connective tissue 
largely takes the place which, in Vertebrates rather higher 
in the scale, is occupied by cartilage, and in still higher 
Vertebrates by bone. 

Each of these three tissues is characterised by possessing a 
large amount of intercellular substance forming a matrix in 
which the cells are imbedded. Thus in the first there is a 



Digitized 



by Google 



46 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



fibrous matrix consisting of either yellow elastic or white fibres, 
the cells being called connective-tissue cells or corpuscles ; in 
the second the matrix consists of a firm ground substance, the 





Fig. 30.— a, hyaline cartilage with cartilage cells ; b, fibro cartilage (from Claus). 

cells being described as cartilage cells ; and in the third the 
matrix contains inorganic lime salts, intimately connected with 
a fibrous matrix, and the imbedded cells are bone cells. 




Fig. 31.— Transverse section through a long bone (after Kdlliker). K, bone 
corpuscles ; G, Haversian canals ; L y lamellae. 

Fat tissue is only a variety of connective tissue, the cells of 
which have become rounded and contain large or small fat 
globules. When the cell is filled with fat, the protoplasm forms 



Digitized 



by Google 



ANIMAL TISSUES. 47 

a delicate envelope to the fat, and contains the nucleus which 
forms a swelling at one part of the surface. 

As the connective tissue is always developed from the middle layer of the 
embryo, and as this layer is absent in the Protozoa and in the Coelenterata, 
to which groups the Amoeba and the Hydra respectively belong, it is obvious 
that no such tissue will occur in these animals. 

Amongst Invertebrates cartilage seldom occurs and bone never, the 
calcareous material occurring in the shells of shell-fish or on the surface of 
the body in crabs and lobsters, being developed on the outside of the true 
integument and having no farther relationship with it than that it is laid 
down by the integument. 

Connective tissue occurs abundantly in all animals above the 
Coelenterata, in most cases forming so complete a supporting 
framework that, could all the other tissues be removed, the 
animal would still retain its shape. 

Muscular tissue. — The essential feature of muscular tissue 
is its power of contraction. In the Amoeba there does not 
seem to be any especially differentiated part of the animal 
which is told off for the purposes of contraction. In the Vorti- 
cella it is the deeper layer of the ectoplasm which seems to 
be especially contractile. In the Hydra, contraction is brought 
about by the activity of the basal processes of the large ecto- 
derm cells, which lie upon the supporting lamella. In the higher 
animals a special tissue is differentiated, which arises from the 
mesoblast, and which consists of cells modified in accordance 
with their functions. Two kinds of muscle cells are described 
— unstriped smooth or involuntary muscle, the last name being 
given to it because in Vertebrates such muscle is not under 
the control of the will ; and striped or striated muscle which 
is characterised by having an intracellular network so arranged 
as to give the appearance under the microscope of alternate 
dark and clear transverse stripes. Each of the fibres of which 
the striated muscle is composed, is enclosed in a cell-membrane 



Digitized 



by Google 



48 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



called the sarcolemma which has one or more nuclei lying on 
its inner surface. 

A collection of such cells or muscle fibres as they are called, 
together with the supporting framework of connective tissue, 
constitutes one of the ordinary voluntary muscles in Vertebrates. 
The smooth or unstriped muscle, which usually only contracts 
slowly, consists of much elongated cells. The muscles of soft- 
bodied Invertebrates, such as Worms and Molluscs, are almost 




Fig. 32.— a, primitive fibril ; b, striated muscle fibre of Lacerta with nuclei and 
nerve termination (from Claus). 

always composed of non-striated cells, whereas hard-bodied 
Invertebrates, like the Crayfish, have striped muscle. In Verte- 
brates the walls of the blood vessels, of the alimentary canal, 
of the bladder, and of some other organs, have smooth muscle ; 
whereas the muscles which move the limbs, etc., and are under 
the control of the will, are composed of striped fibres. 

Nervous tissue. — In the Amoeba and the Vorticella no sign 
of nervous tissue occurs, the whole animal being sensitive. In 
the Hydra there are special ganglionic cells in the ectoderm 
which form the whole nervous system. In some animals of a 



Digitized 



by Google 



ANIMAL TISSUES. 



49 



slightly more complex structure than the Hydra, but belonging 
to the same group, there are superficial sensitive cells, which are 
connected with ganglionic cells lying below the surface, and 
from these ganglion cells fibres pass to the contractile elements. 
In the higher animals the superficial sensory cells form sense 
organs, the deeper cells form the ganglion cells of the central 
nervous system, and the fibres form the nerves. 

b 

3 




Fig. 33.— Smooth muscle (after Frey). a, isolated cells ; b, piece of an artery ; 
1, outer connective tissue layer ; 2, the middle layer formed of smooth muscle 
cells ; 3, inner layer. 

The central nervous system consists of a collection of 
ganglion cells and nerve fibres, which usually form a cord 
running the whole length of the body. In Vertebrates this cord 
lies in the dorsal region of the body, in Invertebrates in the 
ventral. In the former it is much swollen in the anterior 
region to form the brain. In Invertebrates the ganglion cells 
lie outside the fibres, whilst in Vertebrates they are collected 

4 



Digitized 



by Google 



50 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



into a mass forming the grey matter of the cord, this mass 
being surrounded by the fibres which form the white matter of 
the cord. Both cells and fibres are supported by a meshwork 
of connective tissue called neuroglia. 

The central strand, which is the essential element of the fibre, 
is called the axis cylinder. Each nerve fibre is surrounded by 




Fig. 34.— a f bipolar ganglion cell ; b, nerve cell from the anterior corner of the 
human spinal cord ; p, pigment body (after Gerlach). 

a connective tissue envelope, the primitive sheath, and in 
addition to this, in most of the nerve fibres outside the central 
nervous system, there is lying between the primitive sheath 
and the axis cylinder, a fatty sheath, called the medullary 
sheath. Each ganglion cell has one or more processes. These 
are in direct continuation with the axis cylinders of a number 
of nerve fibres which correspond with the number of processes 
of the cell. 



Digitized 



by Google 



ANIMAL TISSUES. 51 

There are two other constituents of the body, the blood and 
the lymph. Both of these may fairly be described as fluid 
tissues, the essential cellular elements of which are represented 
by their amoeboid cells. 

The whole body is entirely composed of the above described 
elementary tissues, mixed in varying proportions ; thus the liver 
and pancreas consist chiefly of epithelial tissues with only a 
slight admixture of connective tissue ; whilst bone and muscle 
consist almost entirely of osseous and contractile tissues re- 
spectively. Some structures, such as blood vessels and 
lymphatic vessels, are composed of epithelial, connective and 
muscular tissues, in varying proportions. In all the larger blood 
vessels these are mixed in such proportions that no special 
tissue can be said to preponderate. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER VIII. 
PLANT TISSUES. 

PLANTS are composed of tissues which are always dis- 
tinguished from each other by (i) differences in the shapes 
of their cells, (2) the ways in which these are produced, and (3) 
their modes of growth. Thus a true plant tissue is defined as 
a group of cells, each of which has been produced and grows 
in a manner similar to all the other cells of the same group. 
A true tissue is usually produced by one or more mother cells 
giving rise by repeated division to a number of daughter cells, 
thus forming a group. If two true tissues coalesce, they are 
said to together form a false tissue. 

The true tissues include in the first place growing or meristem 
tissue, in which the cells are capable of dividing ; and, secondly, 
permanent tissue, in which the cells are no longer capable of 
dividing. 

Growing tissue is divided into primary and secondary 
meristem. The former is the only tissue present in very young 
organs; and the latter occurs in older organs along with 
permanent tissues. All meristem cells are small, they have 
thin smooth walls, and are filled with protoplasm. Permanent 
tissue is formed by the further growth of those cells given off 
by the primary and secondary meristem, which having lost the 
power of dividing, have assumed a permanent form. If a thin 
transverse section of a comparatively young stem of a plant, 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT TISSUES. 



53 



such ,as a sunflower, be cut with a sharp razor, mounted in 
glycerine,*and examined with a low power of the microscope, it 
will' be at once seen that the stem is composed of several 
tissues. These tissues are (i) the limiting tissue or epidermis, 
(2) the ground j tissue, (3) the fibrovascular bundles. The 
epidermis is only one cell thick ; it surrounds the other 




Fig. 35.— Hairs on a young ovary of Cucurbita (from Prantl). b, glandular hair ; 
c, e,f, early stages of development. 

tissues. Further it may be noticed that there are as out- 
growths from it numerous hairs, each of which is composed of 
several cells. Each epidermal cell consists of protoplasm, a 
nucleus, a vacuole, and a thick cell- wall ; the latter, as in all 
plant cells, consists of cellulose which, it will be remembered, 
is composed of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, there being no 



Digitized 



by Google 



54 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



nitrogen in it, as there is in all animal cell-walls or membranes. 
Here and there, there are openings between the cells to allow 
of air passing into the interior of the stem, and the two cells 
guarding the opening, which are called guard-cells, usually 
differ from the rest of the epidermal cells in containing 
chlorophyll* 

The external walls of the cells are especially thick, and the 
outer portion can be separated as a thin cuticle, which is non- 
absorbent and impervious to water. Particles of wax are 




Fig. 36.— Cross section of a leaf of Hyacinthus orientalis. e, epidermis ; s, stoma 
between the two guard cells ; i, air cavity ; p, parenchyma of the fundamental 
tissue (from Prantl). 

frequently imbedded in this cuticle ; these appear on the sur- 
face as fine grains, and give the bloom to plums, grapes, etc. 
The whole of the section within the epidermis is occupied 
by the ground tissue and the fibrovascular bundles. These 
latter will be described presently. 

The ground or fundamental tissue contains cells which 
differ widely from each other in many respects, the chief 
differences being due to the varying thickness of the cell- 
walls. Thus the cells immediately in contact with the fibro- 
vascular bundles have thick walls, and are more or less elongated 

* In the sunflower stem all the epidermal cells contain chlorophyll ; 
this is, however, unusual. 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT TISSUES. 



55 



in a longitudinal direction. These form prosenchymatous 
ground tissue. Again, the cells lying in contact with the 
epidermis have walls which are thickened at the angles, where 
they come into contact with adjoining cells. These form 
collenchymatous ground tissue. The rest of the cells are thin 
walled, and these form by far the largest part of the ground 
tissue and constitute parenchymatous ground tissue. Many 
of these ground-tissue cells, especially the thin-walled par- 

f 




Fig. 37.— Transverse section of the petiole of Helleborus (from Prantl). e, epi- 
dermis ; g, fundamental tissue ; /, fibrovascular bundles ; x t xylem ; c, cambium 
and soft bast ; b, bast fibres. 

enchymatous cells, contain chlorophyll. As a rule, these 
parenchymatous ground-tissue cells do not touch each other 
all round, and the spaces thus left between them are described 
as intercellular spaces. 

The fibrovascular bundles in the stem of a Sunflower, 
which may be taken as a type of Dicotyledonous plants, form a 
ring, dividing the ground tissue into two parts, the part outside 
the ring together with the epidermis forming what is known as 



Digitized 



by Google 



56 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

cortex, the part inside the ring being known as pith, while the 
ground tissue joining the pith with the cortex forms a series of 
rays called medullary rays. The fibrovascular bundles can be 
readily seen even with a low power of the microscope to be 
composed of cells differing considerably from each other in 
size, shape, thickness, and the structure of their walls. The 
part of the bundle pointing towards the epidermis is separated 
from the inner part by a narrow zone of small, thin-walled cells. 
These thin-walled cells constitute the cambium, and as they 
are capable of dividing and giving rise to new cells, the 
cambium is a meristem or growing tissue. If the section be 
examined closely, it will be seen that the cambium is not 
confined to the bundles, but stretches across the medullary 
rays from one bundle to another (this is not clearly indicated 
in the figure), thus forming a complete ring; the cambium 
within the bundle is described as fascicular cambium, and that 
between the bundles as interfascicular cambium. The part of 
the bundle outside the cambium is called phloSm or bast, and 
consists of (i) parenchymatous cells, (2) bast fibres which are 
elongated prosenchymatous cells, and (3) sieve tubes. If a 
longitudinal section be compared with a transverse one, the 
sieve tubes can be seen to consist of a series of cells placed end 
to end, the transverse walls of which are perforated plates, the 
sieve plates. The protoplasm of the cells forming the sieve 
tubes, is continuous through the sieve plates. 

The part of the bundle inside the cambium is called the 
xylem or wood, and consists also of three kinds of cells : of 
parenchymatous cells, of elongated prosenchymatous wood- 
fibre cells, and of wood vessels. These last consist of a series 
of cells placed end to end, the transverse walls of which have 
broken down, so that a continuous tube is formed. The walls 
of the xylem vessels are thickened in various ways. 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT TISSUES. 



57 



The above is a description of the arrangement found in the 

_C si Jc . I P 




M j • s* t h f 





e B, 



H 



i- 



M 



Fig. 38. — A, transverse section of an open fibrovascular bundle in the stem of 
the Sunflower ; B, radial vertical section through a similar bundle ; M, pith ; 
X, xylem ; C, cambium ; P, phloem ; /?, cortex ; s, small, and s', large spiral 
vessels ; /, pitted vessels ; f pitted vessels in course of formation ; h, wood 
fibres; sb, sieve tubes; b, bast. fibres; e t bundle sheath; ic, interfascicular 
cambium (from Prantl). 

Dicotyledons and Gymnosperms. Such stems increase in 
thickness by means of the activity in dividing, manifested by 



Digitized 



by Google 



58 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

the cells of the cambium-layer. The fascicular cambium, that 
is, the cambium within the bundle, gives off new cells exter- 
nally, which develop into the various constituents of the phloem, 
and internally, those which develop into the various forms of 
xylem cells. In the same way the interfascicular cambium 
gives rise to new cells which form the ground tissue of the 
medullary rays. 

In the group of the Monocotyledons the structure of the 
stem is similar to that of the Dicotyledons, except that no 
cambium occurs ; hence, no new cells can be formed. The 
stem, therefore, will cease to increase in thickness when the 
cells constituting it have attained their full size. As there is 
no new cell-forming layer in the bundles of Monocotyledons, 
they are described as definite or closed, whilst the bundles of 
Dicotyledons and Gymnosperms are described as indefinite or 
open. 

In a few Monocotyledons increase in thickness is unlimited, owing to 
the formation of a special meristem tissue in the ground tissue ; this gives 
rise to new closed fibrovascular bundles and new ground tissue. 

As the growth of the cells in the epidermis is limited, it is 
obviously necessary that there should be some special arrange- 
ment made to prevent the anomaly of deeper tissues of indefinite 
growth being surrounded by a superficial tissue of definite 
growth. To obviate this condition a special meristem tissue 
(the cork cambium) forms in the ground tissue beneath the 
epidermis. The function of this tissue is to form internally 
new ground-tissue cells, which contain chlorophyll, and ex- 
ternally other cells whose walls undergo a special change 
which results in the formation of cork, a substance which, like 
the cuticle of the epidermis, is impervious to water. As the 
stem increases in thickness, the epidermis ruptures and be- 
comes detached, the new formed cork taking its place; this 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT TISSUES. 59 



again, during the following winter, ruptures, and its place is 
taken by the cork which has been formed during the summer. 
The main part of the stem in dicotyledonous trees is formed 
by the permanent xylem or wood, and this wood presents a 
series of concentric rings, each ring marking a year's growth of 
the tree ; this appearance is produced by the unequal size of 
the wood cells, according to whether they have been formed in 




Fig. 39.— Transverse section through the root of Acorus calanus (from Strasburger). 
m, pith ; s, wood ; v f phloem ; p, peri cambium ; e t endodermis ; c t cortex. 

the spring or autumn. The cells given off from the cambium 
to form wood in the . spring and early summer grow to a con- 
siderable size and appear light, whilst those formed in the late 
summer and autumn only increase in size to a comparatively 
small extent, and hence, being closely packed together, appear 
dark. 

The root has the same essential structure as the stem, but 
the arrangement of the parts is somewhat different; thus, 
whereas in the stems of the higher plants the phloem lies 



Digitized 



by Google 



60 ELEME2STTARY BIOLOGY. 

outside and the xylem inside, in a young root the phloem and 

xylem alternate, and in addition there is a layer of meristem 

tissue lying outside the flbrovascular bundles, and inside the 

bundle sheath. This is called pericambium, and from it, in 

most cases, the root branches arise. 

This mode of origin of root branches from the deeper tissues 

is characteristic of roots, they being said to arise endogenously, 

whereas in stems, branches arise from the superficial part of 

the stem, and are hence said to arise exogenously. 

Van Tieghem divides the tissues of both stems and roots into three 
primary regions : (i) Epidermis ; (2) Cortex ; and (3) the central cylinder 
or stele, which includes vascular bundles, pith, etc. In most flowering 
plants and in the embryos of all vascular plants there is only one such 
cylinder ; such plants he describes as monostelic. If the cylinder branches 
as in most ferns, the branch he considers to correspond not to a single 
vascular bundle, but to a complete stele. 

If a longitudinal section, made through the growing point of 
a stem, be examined, it will be seen that the extreme apex 
consists of meristem tissue, the cells of which are all almost 
exactly alike ; that is, at the apex, the cells have not yet become 
differentiated into groups of tissues. 

If a longitudinal section through the growing point of the 
root be similarly examined, the same structure will be seen, 
and it will be noticed that, in addition, a cap of cells is formed 
on the surface of the growing point for the purpose of protect- 
ing the delicate meristem tissue from injury, as the root forces 
its way through the earth. 

If sections be made of the stem and root at different stages 
of their growth, the gradual differentiation of the cells into the 
permanent tissues can be studied, and it will then be noticed 
that the cambium cells are the least differentiated, that is, in 
the older parts they are very similar to the meristem cells at the 
apex. 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT TISSUES. 



6r 



In many of the lower plants, such as Ferns and Mosses, the 

en _^^- pi — 




Fig. 40.— Median longitudinal section through the root-apex of Hordeum vulgare 
(from Strasburger). k, Calyptrogen ; c, thickened outer wall of the epidermis ; 
d, dermatogen ; pr, periblem ; pi, plerome ; en, endodermis ; i, intercellular 
passage filled with air ; a, row of cells which will form the central duct ; 
r, disorganised cells of the root cap. 

extreme growing apex of the stem and root will be seen to 



Digitized 



by Google 



62 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

consist of a single pyramidal cell with its base turned outwards. 
From either side of this, new cells are continually being divided 
off. In the root the cells forming the root cap are given off 
from the base of the single apical cell. 

Leaves have essentially a similar structure to stems, except 
that there is no meristem tissue at the apex. At the same time 
the tissues are modified in accordance with their functions ; 
thus the epidermis, especially on the under surface of the leaf, 
has in it a very large number of stomata; whilst the ground 
tissue consists of spongy mesophyll which is composed of cells 
of irregular outline with very large intercellular spaces between 
them ; the intercellular spaces are in direct communication with 
the external air through the stomata. The parenchyma cells 
on the upper surface of the leaf are very frequently somewhat 
elongated, and are arranged side by side in the form of a 
palisade. All the ground-tissue cells of the leaf contain a large 
number of chlorophyll corpuscles. The fibrovascular bundles 
in the leaves of Dicotyledons contain cambium, but this only 
remains active for a short time. 

The leaf is of necessity limited in its growth on account of 
the absence of an apical meristem, and of the activity of its 
cambium being but temporary. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER IX. 
PLANT STRUCTURE. 

PLANTS present a gradually increasing complexity of 
structure, as one proceeds from an examination of the 
lowest to the highest forms. 

There are four large groups, or sub-kingdoms, the Thallo- 
phytes, the Bryophytes, the Pteridophytes, and the Phanero- 
gams. 

The Thallophytes include all plants in which no separation 
into stem structures and leaf structures can be made. The 
whole plant consists of a thallus, in which the tissues are only 
differentiated to a small extent. 

The lowest members of this group are the unicellular plants, 
such as Gleocapsa, Protococcus, and the Yeast plant. Amongst 
the highest forms' are the Mushrooms, and some of the more 
complex Sea-weeds. All Thallophytes, which contain chloro- 
phyll, are collectively known as Algae, whilst those in which no 
chlorophyll is found are classed as Fungi. The lowest forms 
are unicellular. In those next in simplicity, the plant consists 
of a colony of cells, each of which is exactly like all the others, 
that is, they have joined together to form a group, but there is 
no division of labour (Spirogyra). The next advance is, the 
formation of a colony of cells, in which some of the cells are 
told off for purposes of reproduction. Then come plants, like 

the Vaucheria, in which a portion of the thallus may function 

63 



Digitized 



by Google 



64 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



as an organ of attachment. A little higher in the scale, plants 
are found like the moulds, Penicillium and Eurotium, in which 




Fig. 4?.— Eurotium repens (after Sachs). A, portion of mycelium with hyphae ; 
c, hypha bearing conidia, the conidia have already fallen off from the sterig- 
mata (sf) ; as, a young aseogonium ; B, as, ascogonium with a pollinodium (p) ; 
C, another with hyphae growing up round it ; D, a fructification seen on the 
exterior ; E, F, sections of unripe fructifications ; w, the investment ; /, fila- 
ments arising from the ascogonium, which subsequently bear the asci ; g, an 
ascus j H, a ripe ascospore (magnified). 

some cells are told off to form hyphae or threads ; some of these 
are submerged, and grow down into the soil (jam, etc.), on 
which the plant is growing, others form a felt-like mass or 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT STRUCTURE. 



65 



mycelium on the surface, whilst a third set (aerial hyphas) are 
told off to bear spores (conidia). Each spore, if it fall on a 
suitable soil, will develop into a new thallus. In the Eurotium, 




Fig. 42.— Fucus vesiculosus (Bladder wrack) (from Prantl). 
/, fertile branch. 



b, air bladders ; 



in addition to this vegetative mode of reproduction, there is a 
sexual one, in which male and female hyphae are produced. 
These unite together, become surrounded by masses of 
other hyphae, and give off branches (asci) which bear spores 

5 



Digitized 



by Google 



66 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

(ascospores), each of which develops into a new plant. This 
sexual mode of reproduction occurs occasionally also in the 
Penicillium. 

Many Thallophytes are parasitic upon plants, and a few, such as the fungus- 
producing ringworm, upon animals; these are usually more complicated 
in their processes of reproduction. Others like the mushrooms are sapro- 
phytes, obtaining their nourishment from decomposing organic matter. In 
the mushrooms the whole structure appears very complicated ; the spore- 
bearing mass (sporocarp) arises from a mycelium of threads, and bears on 
its under surface a number of lamellae or plate-like structures, each of 
which consists of an inner cellular mass, and an outer covering of elongated 
cells arranged side by side, the latter giving rise to numerous outgrowths 
which contain spores. 

In the higher Seaweeds, like the Fucus (Bladder wrack), 
there is an outer layer, many cells thick, forming a cortex, and 
an inner mass, the medulla, consisting of hyphae. The cortex 
contains numerous cavities (conceptacles) which bear male and 
female cells, a new thallus invariably arising as the result of the 
fertilisation of the female by the male cells. The thallus not 
only presents a distinct differentiation into the cortex and the 
medulla, the former giving rise to modified reproductive cells, 
but a branching of it takes place, and, at its attached end, it 
is modified to form rhizoids, by which it fixes itself to stones 
or rocks. Many of the Seaweeds are very beautifully coloured. 
In many forms, as in the Fucus, the presence of chlorophyll 
is obscured by the existence of a brown colouring material. 
In some of the highest Thallophytes (Chara and Nitella) there 
is a still further differentiation of parts, the thallus giving rise 
to lateral appendages not unlike modified leaves. 

A Lichen is not a simple plant, but consists of two plants, an alga and 
a fungus, growing together. As they are mutually helpful they form an 
example of symbiosis. 

In the second sub-kingdom, that of the Bryophytes (Mosses 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT STRUCTURE. 



67 



and Liverworts), there is usually a distinct differentiation into 
stem and leaves, but no true roots or fibrovascular bundles 
occur. 

The plant which bears sexual organs, can also be dis- 
tinguished from the plant bearing only asexual spores, that is 




Fig. 43.— A, upper portion of a branch of Nitella flexilis ; s, s, the stem ; b, the 
leaves ; with sp, the female, and a, the male organs ; B, part of a fertile leaf 
of Chara fragilis (*, x); b, b" t the leaves; the female organ contains the 
oosphere, E; kr f corona of investing cells; a, the antheridium (after Sachs). 

there are two generations. The spore grows into a sexual plant, 
which bears male and female organs, the male producing male 
elements (antherozoids) and the female producing female ele- . 
ments (egg cells). The egg cell is fertilised by an antherozoid, 
and then grows into an asexual plant, which bears only spores. 
Thus we have an "alternation of generations," the sexual 
generation alternating with the asexual. The ordinary Moss 
plant is the sexual generation. The asexual generation grows 



Digitized 



by Google 



68 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



from the fertilised egg cell, but does not lose its connection 
with the sexual, it being borne upon a stalk imbedded in the 
tissues of the sexual plant. 




Fig. 44.— Funaria hygrometrica (from Prantl). A, origin of the spofogonium (/,/) 
in the ventral portion (Jb f b) of the archegonium (longitudinal section) ; B, C t 
different further stages of development of the sporogonium (/) and of the 
calyptra (c) ; ft, neck of the archegonium. 

Histologically a distinct differentiation may be observed. 
First there is an external protective layer of brownish cells, 
next comes a deeper layer of cells containing chlorophyll, 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT STRUCTURE. 



69 



and lastly, there is a central mass of cells, usually without 
chlorophyll. Running longitudinally in the central mass there 
is a collection of small thin-walled cells constituting the axial 




Fig. 45. — Scolopendrium vulgare (from Strasburger). A, transverse section 
through the fertile part of the leaf; 1, indusium ; sg, sporangium ; B—E, 
sporangia ; B and E seen from the -side ; D from the dorsal and C from the 
ventral aspect ; F, a spore. 

cylinder or bundle. These cells contain only water, having 
no living contents. Root hairs or rhizoids are developed 
from the lower parts of the stem; these arise from single 



Digitized 



by Google 



70 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

cells, and are repeatedly branched. In some cases there is a 
limiting epidermal layer of chlorophyll-containing cells, with 
openings in it, leading to an air chamber in which lie thread- 
like groups of more chlorophyll-containing cells. 

The Pteridophytes or Vascular Cryptogams include Horse- 
tails, Ferns, and Club mosses. 

In these plants we see that differentiation of labour has 
taken place to a considerable extent. In those characters per- 
ceptible to the naked eye of such a plant as the Bracken Fern 




Fig. 46. — Prothallium of a Fern (from Prantl) seen from the under surface. 
ar, archegonia ; an, antheridia ; ft, root-hairs. 

(Herts aquilind) we see a well-marked distinction into roots, 
underground stem, and branching leaves. On the under 
surfaces of the leaves there are brown bodies (sori), which are 
collections of sporangia, each sporangium containing numerous 
spores. We thus see that, whereas in the Moss the spore 
bearing, that is the asexual plant, is small and insignificant, in 
the Fern it is large. The spores give rise to the small leaf-like 
bodies so constantly seen in the spring on the surface of the 
soil in ferneries. Each of these is a small plant with well 
devoloped rootlets, and a leaf-like chlorophyll containing disc. 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT TISSUES. 71 



In most Ferns this small plant (the prothallium) bears on its 
under surface male and female sexual organs (antheridia and 
archegonia) and therefore forms the sexual generation of the 
Fern. The female or egg cell becomes fertilised by a male 
element (antherozoid), and then develops into another large 
spore-bearing plant, which at first retains its connection with 
the prothallium. 




Fig. 47.— Antheridium of Adiantum Capillus Veneris (from Prantl). />, prothallium ; 
a, antheridium ; s, antherozoid ; b, the vesicle containing starch grains. 

In some of the higher Pteridophytes, such as the Selaginella, 
the spore-bearing plant gives rise to two kinds of spores, small 
(microspores) and larger (macrospores). A microspore, when 
deposited on the soil, grows into a prothallium bearing only 
male sexual elements (antherozoids), whereas a macrospore 
produces a prothallium bearing only female sexual elements 
(egg cells) j we thus have male and female prothallia. The 
egg cells of the female prothallia are fertilised by the 



Digitized 



by Google 



72 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



\ 



antherozoids of the male prothallia, and then grow up into new 
spore-bearing plants. 




Fig. 48.— Polypodium vulgare (from Strasburger). A, unripe archegonium ; 
AT', neck canal cell ; K", ventral canal cell ; o, oosphere ; B> ripe opened 
archegonium. 

In minute structure the Pteridophytes are far more complex 
than the Bryophytes. The axial cylinder is replaced by a well- 




Fig. 49.— Adiantum Capillus Veneris (after Sachs). pp t prothallium ; b, the first 
leaf of the young fern, which is still in connection with the prothallium ; 
uf, or", its first and second roots ; /r, root hairs of the prothallium. 

developed fibrovascular bundle, and the epidermis is sharply 
marked off from the underlying ground tissue, which itself 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT STRUCTURE. 7$ 

becomes divided into a tissue composed of cells with thick 
walls (sclerenchymatous tissue) and thin-walled, chlorophyll- 
containing ground tissue. 

In the leaves there is a well-developed spongy mesophyll, 
the growing point of the stem shows a well-defined single 
apical cell, and in the root the corresponding cell is protected 
by a root cap. 




Fig. 5b.— Diagram of a flower (from Prantl). Ke, Calyx ; K, corolla ; /, filament ; 
a, anther with two pollen sacs open ; p, pollen grains ; ps, pollen tube J 
g, style ; F, ovary j S, ovule ; i, the integument of the ovule ; em, embryo 
sac ; E, the oosphere (egg cell). 

The Phanerogamia or Flowering plants include all the 
higher plants, and are characterised by producing seeds, which 
are developed as the result of fertilisation, and which are borne 
upon the plant until they have reached maturity, when they 
become detached. The minute structure of the higher 
plants has been fully described under the head of tissues, and 
I would hsre only point out, that the differentiation of the cells 
to form different tissues has reached its highest development 
in these plants. 



Digitized 



by Google 



74 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



The Reproductive system in the Phanerogams consists of 
groups of cells borne upon and enclosed by modified leaves, 
the whole arrangement constituting a flower. 

The flower stalk is much compressed longitudinally, with 
the result that the modified leaves forming the petals, sepals, 
stamens and carpels are all placed very close together on the 
stalk. The sepals are usually green, and are mainly protective 
in function ; they form a whorl enclosing and protecting the 
other parts during their development. The petals are usually 




Fig. si.— A, Apocarpous gyncecium of Aconite ; B, simple apocarpous gynoecium or 
pistil of Meliontus ; C, Tetramerous syncarpous pistil of Rhamnus ; D, ovary 
of Saxifraga, formed of two carpels ; /, torus ; /, ovaries ; g, style ; n, stigma ; 
b, ventral suture (from Prantl). 

brightly coloured, and their most important function is to 
attract insects to the flower. The form of both sepals and 
petals is not unlike that of an ordinary green leaf. The 
stamens are much modified in form, and must be looked upon 
as leaves specially modified for the purpose of producing 
microspores. They are therefore described as the male organs 
of the plant, and are said to form the andrcecium. The 
stamen usually consists of a long thread-like stalk (the filament) 
on which there is a spore case or anther, generally consisting 
of two sacs (the pollen sacs), connected together by the con- 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT STRUCTURE. 



75 



tinuation of the filament (the connective). Each pollen sac 
or microsporangium contains within it numerous microspores, 
or, as they are more usually called, pollen grains. The 
carpels are leaves modified for the production and protection 
of macrosporangia, usually called ovules ; within each macro- 
sporangium there is a macrospore or embryo sac. The apices 
of the leaves are produced into a rod (the style) the top of 
which is swollen to form the stigma which is provided with 
a sticky secretion. Sometimes there is only one carpel, but 





Fig. 52.— Diagram of H hypogynous ; P, perigynous ; E, epigynous flowers ; 
a, axis ; k, calyx i x t corolla ; s, stamens ; /, carpels ; n t stigma ; sk, ovule 
(from Prantl). 

more usually there are three or more, and the number of 
macrosporangia (ovules) present varies considerably. The 
carpels form the so-called ovary, the whole macrospore-bearing 
arrangement being described as the gyncecram, female organ 
or pistil. 

In most of the higher Flowering plants each flower contains 
both stamens and carpels, but in some cases only stamen- 
bearing or male flowers occur on the one plant, whilst another 
produces only carpel-bearing or female flowers. In yet other 
cases male and female flowers are borne upon the same plant 
but on different parts of it. For example in most Gymnosperms 



Digitized 



by Google 



76 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



(Pines and Firs) the staminal leaves are borne upon one branch 
and the female flowers form a cone upon another branch. 
From the above description it will be seen, that the large 
Flowering plant corresponds with the small asexual generation 
of the Moss and with the large asexual generation of the Fern, 
it (like the higher Ferns) bearing both male and female spores 
(microspores and macrospores). 

e 




Fig. 53.— Ovuliferous scale of Pinus sylvestris (from Strasburger). /r, ovuliferous 
scale with its two ovules (s) and the central rib (c) ; behind is the bract (6). 
The integument of the ovule has grown out into two prolongations on to which 
pollen grains have fallen. 

Fertilisation and development. — The microspore or pollen 
grain is set free by the rupture of the pollen sac, and is then 
carried by the wind or by insects to another flower ; if it falls 
upon the stigma, it is retained there by the sticky secretion. 
The subsequent processes are simpler in Gymnosperms (pines, 
firs, etc.) than in the higher flowering plants (Angiosperms). 
In the former the pollen grains are conducted, by means of a 
rib in the scale leaf which bears the ovules, directly to the 
micropyle or opening in the integuments of the ovule. The 
pollen grain then develops a tube, called the pollen tube, which 



Digitized 



by Google 



PLANT STRUCTURE. 



77 



passes down through the tissues of the ovule until it reaches 
the central part of this structure. The pollen grain and its 
tube together represent a much reduced male prothallium. 



nc 




Fig. 54.— Median longitudinal section through ovule of Picea vulgaris, e, embryo 
sac filled with endosperm ; a, ventral portion and c, neck of an archegonium ; 
h, the nucleus of the oosphere ; nc, the nucellus of the ovule ; p, pollen grains ; 
/, pollen tubes traversing the nucellus ; i, integument ; s, the wing of the 
seed (from Strasburger). 

The nucleus of the cell from which the pollen tube has grown 
divides to form two or more nuclei, which represent the 
antherozoids or male sexual elements, borne upon the male 
prothallium of one of the higher Ferns. 

The ovule consists of integuments, and a mass of tissue, the 



Digitized 



by Google 



78 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

nucellns, the central part of which forms a sac, the embryo 
sac, within which archegonia are formed. Each archegonium 
(corpusculum) bears an egg cell. Thus the embryo sac, in 
which nutrient material (endosperm) has developed, is a minute 
female prothaUinm, bearing female sexual elements or egg 
cells. 

After the pollen tube has grown down and come into contact 
with an archegonium, one of its nuclei (antherozoids) fertilises 
the egg cell, which, immediately after fertilisation begins to 
divide, and soon develops into an embryo with seed leaves 
(cotyledons), a root (radicle), and a stem (plumule). The 
seed, containing its embryo, now becomes detached from the 
large plant, and if it fall on suitable soil the integuments will 
decay and rupture, the radicle will grow down into the soil 
and develop root hairs, the plumule will grow upwards and 
develop branches, leaves, etc., and thus a new pine tree will 
be produced. 

In the higher flowering plants the male and female prothallia 
are still further reduced in size, and in detail the development 
is rather more complex. 

The Phanerogamia are divided into two large groups : the 
Gymnosperms (naked-seeded plants, pines, firs, etc.) in which 
the ovule is not enclosed in an ovary, and the Angiosperms 
in which it is enclosed in an ovary. 

The Angiosperms are further subdivided into Monocotyledons 
and Dicotyledons. In the former, which includes grasses, lilies, 
orchids, etc., the embryo has only one seed leaf (cotyledon), 
the fibrovascular bundles possess no cambium, and the leaves 
are parallel veined. In the latter, which includes the large 
majority of flowering plants, there are two seed leaves in the 
embryo, cambium is present in the fibrovascular bundles, and 
the venation of the leaves is reticulate. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER X. 
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PLANTS AND ANIMALS, 

IF one of the higher plants, such as an oak, be compared 
with one of the higher vertebrates, the difference between 
the two seems so striking that it appears by no means easy to 
see any points of resemblance. The plant is stationary ; its 
leaves are coloured green, owing to the presence of chlorophyll; 
it is built up of cells with cell-walls, composed of cellulose, 
and its food consists of carbon dioxide, and simple salts, like 
sulphates, nitrates, etc., which are taken up in solution by its 
roots. The animal, on the other hand, moves actively from place 
to place ; it does not contain any chlorophyll ; its food chiefly 
consists of solid complex substances like proteids, fat, starches, 
etc. ; and, further, its cells frequently have no definite cell-wall, 
and when they do the cell-wall is not composed of cellulose. 
Although in the main the above differences can be said to 
hold throughout the animal and vegetable kingdoms, yet to 
all of them there are numerous exceptions, so that in deter- 
mining whether any given organism is a plant or an animal, 
one must be guided by a consideration of ail its characters, 
placing it in the animal and vegetable kingdom according as to 
whether it possesses chiefly animal or vegetable characteristics. 
As to the first of the plant characteristics, that is, their 
stationary mode of life, there are numerous exceptions 
among the lower plants. Thus the Protococcus at one stage is 



Digitized 



by Google 



So ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

exceedingly active and moves freely through the water from 
place to place. In all other points, however, it possesses the 
special plant characteristics. Its possession of chlorophyll, of a 
cellulose cell-wall, and its mode of obtaining its food, all point 
conclusively to the fact that it is a plant and not an animal. 

On the other hand, amongst animals, numerous instances of 
their remaining stationary occur. For instance, Sponges grow 
attached to rocks, stones, seaweed, etc. ; and yet at one period 
of their lives they swim freely, and are evidently animals. 
Moreover, they feed upon complex substances, such as micro- 
scopic organisms ; they do not contain chlorophyll, although 
in the freshwater sponge there is a green substance, which is 




Fig. 55.— Growing cells of Yeast (Saccharotnyces cerevisice) (from Prantl). 

closely analogous to it ; and, lastly, in them no cellulose occurs 
in the form of cell-walls. 

As to the second characteristic of plants, namely, the 
possession of chlorophyll, the exceptions are also very 
numerous. Thus Fungi form an exception. As an example 
we may take the Yeast plant ; it contains no chlorophyll, and 
therefore is unable to obtain its carbon from carbonic acid, 
and hence requires to be supplied with a more complex carbon- 
containing substance, such as sugar. Further, it is not 
stationary in any one place, but, on the other hand, it does 
not move actively, but only floats about. Moreover, it usually 
obtains its nitrogen, like other plants, from simple chemical 
compounds containing nitrogen, which are dissolved in the 
water in which it lives. Chlorophyll does not often occur in 



Digitized 



by Google 



DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PLANTS AND ANIMALS. 81 



animals ; however occasionally it is present, as in the green 
Hydra {Hydra viridis). It is also found in some low worms.* 
In the animals in which it occurs the protoplasm is, by its 
agency, rendered capable of decomposing carbon dioxide, and 
of forming starch. In other respects, however, such as their 
mode of obtaining nitrogen from complex nitrogenous bodies, 
their active movements, the absence of cellulose, etc., these 
organisms have the animal characteristics, and hence are classed 
as animals and not vegetables. 

With regard to the third plant characteristic, i.e., the posses- 
sion by the plant-cell of a cellulose cell- wall, numerous uni- 
cellular plants at some stage of their existence consist of naked 
protoplasm, no cellulose cell-wall being present. This is seen 
in the naked swarm spores of some low Algae, such as the 
microzoid of Protococcus and the swarm spore of Vaucheria. 

On the other hand the possession of cellulose is not confined 
exclusively to members of the vegetable kingdom, as a few 
unicellular animals possess it, and it is even found in one class 
of low Vertebrates, the Tunicata. 

As to the fourth plant characteristic, namely, the way in 
which plants are nourished, several, such as yeast and other 
fungi, obtain their carbon from complex organic substances 
containing carbon, and, on the other hand, animals containing 
chlorophyll, obtain some of their carbon from carbon dioxide. 
A few plants, such as the Sundew (Drosera), obtain some of their 
nitrogen from complex nitrogenous compounds, such as pro- 
teids. Any small insect which alights on one of the tentacles 

* In Convoluta Roscoffensis it has been conclusively shown that the 
chlorophyll-containing cells are Algae, associated with the Turbellarian 
worm in a symbiotic partnership. It is not improbable that many of the 
other cases of chlorophyll-containing animals are in reality only cases of 
symbiosis. 

6 



Digitized 



by Google 



82 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 



of the Drosera is glued to it by means of its sticky secretion. 
This tentacle then bends inwards, so as to carry the insect 
towards the centre of the leaf, while the other tentacles bring 
their club-shaped ends, in which the digestive glands lie, into 
contact with the insect, upon which a secretion, which has the 
character of a digestive juice, is then poured. The proteid 
bodies in the insect are thus digested, or rendered soluble, 
and the resulting fluid is absorbed by the leaf. In all other 
respects these plants possess the ordinary plant characteristics. 

The taking in of soluble food only is not peculiar to plants, 
as many parasites obtain all their nourishment by absorbing it 
through their body-walls. 

We have thus seen that there is no single attribute of animals 
which is not shared by some plants ; and, on the other hand, 
there is no plant characteristic which is possessed by plants 
alone ; hence it is necessary to allow that plants and animals 
are fundamentally identical, and, in fact, are only divisions of 
a single vital stock. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XI. 
1NVERTEBRATA. 

THE animal kingdom is divided into two large groups — the 
Protozoa which are all unicellular, and the Metazoa 
which are all multicellular. The Metazoa are further sub- 
divided into Invertebrate Metazoa and Vertebrate Metazoa. 
The Vertebrate Metazoa, which include all the vertebrated 
animals, will be considered in a later chapter. 

The Invertebrata, or animals without a backbone, are 
characterised by the following constant features : they possess 
no backbone ; the nerve cord or nerve cords are never dorsal, 
but always either ventral or lateral, and the heart is always 
placed in the dorsal region, whereas in Vertebrata the nerve 
cord is dorsal and the heart ventral. 

The invertebrate Metazoa are divided into the Ccelenterata 
and the Ccelomata. 

The Coelenterata have the following characteristics : there is 
only one cavity, the alimentary canal ; there is no body cavity ; 
there are only two definite layers to the body, the hypoblast 
and epiblast; they have radial symmetry, and the long 
axis of the adult corresponds to the long axis of the gastrula 
(the Hydra belongs to this group). The Coelomata on the 
other hand possess a body cavity, a distinct middle layer of 
cells (the mesoblast), and the longitudinal (head to tail) axis 
of the body does not correspond to the long axis of the 

gastrula. 

83 



Digitized 



by Google 



84 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 



The Ccelomata are again subdivided into Vermes (worms), 
a heterogeneous group of animals differing very widely from 
each other; Echinodermata (Star-fishes, Sea-urchins, etc.); 
Arthropods (Crabs, Centipedes, Insects, Spiders, etc.), and 
Mollnsca (Mussels, Snails, Cuttle-fish, etc.). 



Protozoa are subdivided into three groups. 

1. Rhizopoda, of which Amceba is a good example. 

There are simpler forms than Amoeba, and these have been grouped 
together under the name Protomyxa. In some of these forms no nucleus 
has yet been discovered. 

Belonging to the Rhizopoda are a group of shell-bearing 
forms, most of which live in the sea ; when they die they sink 
down to the bottom ; their shells, however, persist and help to 
form the "ooze" which lies on the surface of the sea-bottom. 
Most kinds of chalk consist of shells of Rhizopoda which have 
accumulated in past ages; there are also enormous numbers 
in sea-sand, one observer having estimated that one ounce of 
sea-sand may contain as many as one and a half millions of 
shells of dead Rhizopoda. 

2. Infusoria. — The Vorticella is a good example of this 
group. 

3. Gregarinid© (Sporozoa). — These are parasitic Protozoa, 
consisting of Gregarinae (q.v.) and Psorosperms. The latter are 
parasitic upon all kinds of animals, both vertebrate and in- 
vertebrate ; they have been found in the blood, are exceedingly 
common in the liver of the rabbit, and have been found in the 
human subject in the liver and in cancerous growths. The 
importance of these parasites with regard to disease is not 
yet settled. 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 85 



Sponges (Porifera). — Sponges form the connecting link 
between unicellular animals on the one hand and multicellular 
animals on the other. Although multicellular, yet the individual 
cells, of which they are composed, are only loosely united 
together. Some of the Sponges, indeed, appear more like 
colonies of unicellular organisms than like single multicellular 
animals. With the exception of one fresh-water species, all 
sponges live in the sea, attached to rocks, shells, seaweed, etc. 

The Sponge, like all other animals, starts life as a single cell ; 
the cell segments so form a sphere which is free swimming ; 
finally a two-layered sac or gastrula is formed; this attaches 
itself by its blastophoral end to a rock, pores form between the 
ectoderm cells, the free end of the animal ruptures to form an 
exhalent aperture, and the sponge grows up into the adult 
form. The endoderm cells are ciliated and loosely attached 
together, with pores between them. The outer layer or 
ectoderm consists of similar cells which, however, are not 
ciliated. Between these two layers is a gelatinous connecting 
layer, the mesogloea, amongst the cells of which crystals of 
lime salts occur. Water containing food substances is sucked 
in by the action of the cilia of the internal cells, through the 
many pores present in the walls, and is passed out through the 
large aperture at the upper part of the sac The inner cells 
take up the food substances from the water as it passes through. 
In the adult condition of most sponges, the body becomes very 
complicated, owing to the folding of the endoderm to produce 
numerous ridges and grooves, and by the formation of numerous 
buds which may fuse together, or which may grow more at 
one part than another. As a result of the fusion of buds and 
unequal growth of the animal itself, a very intricate system of 
canals is formed. The original central canal, the depressions 
formed in this, the canals of the buds, and the numerous pores 



Digitized 



by Google 



85 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



occurring in the body-wall all take part in the formation of this 
system. In the middle layers of the parent and buds, spicules 
of carbonate of lime are deposited in some sponges, in others 
spicules of silica, and in others (as the ordinary bath sponge) a 
framework of horny material may be developed. A single 
sponge may be artificially made to give rise to a considerable 




Fig. 56.— Longitudinal section through Sycon raphanus (from Claus). O, osculum 
with collar of spicules ; Rt f radial tubes which open into the central cavity. 



number of individuals by cutting it up into pieces and placing 
each piece under favourable conditions for growth. This 
method is largely used in the propagation of bath sponges 
commercially. The method of reproduction in the freshwater 
Sponge (Spongilla) is interesting. When food becomes scarce 
and the water cold as in the autumn, the Sponge develops 
clumps of cells called gemmules ; the parent then dies, and in 
spring the gemmules float away and give rise to new Sponges, 



Digitized 



by Google 



1NVERTEBRATA. 87 



some of which are males and some females. Egg cells are 
produced in the female, and after having been fertilised by 
cells from the male, develop into new Sponges. 



Coelenterata. — The Ccelenterata include the Jelly-fishes, Sea- 
anemones, Corals, etc. The group is divided into two large 
classes — the Hydrozoa, well illustrated by the Hydra, and the 
Actinozoa, which includes the Sea-anemones. Both classes 
include individuals which lay down lime salts either in their 
tissues or outside ' their bodies with the result that corals are 
formed. 

Hydrozoa. — Many of the sea forms live together in colonies. 
A single hydra-like form (a polypite) fixes itself by its foot to 
a rock or piece of seaweed ; and then from the foot develops 
a stalk which grows upwards. Upon this numerous other 
polypites are borne. As these polypites grow as buds from the 
stalk, which has itself grown as a bud from the original polypite, 
all the members of the colony are structurally continuous, the 
stomach of each being continuous through the tubular centre 
of the stalk with the stomachs of the rest. After a time, divi- 
sion of labour occurs in the colony ; some polypites become 
especially adapted for feeding (nutritive polypites), others are 
told off to function as reproductive polypites. In some free 
swimming forms some of the polypites are provided with air 
sacs to enable the colony to float, and again others with hard 
leaf-shaped structures which serve to protect the colony. We 
thus see that in the higher forms there is considerable division 
of labour. 

In such a colony, the proliferous polypites often become 
much modified in form. Sometimes they detach themselves 
from the parent and swim about freely, being then called 
medusoids. These medusoid forms are sexual, bearing male 



Digitized 



by Google 



88 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



and female organs. After fertilisation an egg cell grows into 
an embryo which, for a short period, swims about freely ; it 
then settles down and grows into a new colony, which again 
buds off sexual persons. 




Fig. 57.— Branch of an Obelia stock (from Claus). O, mouth of a nutritive polyp 
with extended tentacles ; M , Medusa buds on the body of a proliferous polyp ; 
Thy bell-shaped cup (Jheca) of a nutritive polyp. 

This life history forms a perfect example of " Alternation of 
Generations." The asexual generation consists of the colony, 
which only grows vegetatively by the production of buds. 
The proliferous buds become sexual animals, and form the 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 89 



sexual generation, which in its turn gives rise to a new asexual 
colony. The sexual persons, when they are free swimming, 
are rather more highly developed than the asexual forms, in 
that they have a nervous system, and in many cases pigment 
spots (so-called eyes), and a system of radial canals branching 
from the stomach. Some of the members of this class 
develop a calcareous skeleton, thus forming one kind of coral. 




Fig. 58.— Branch of a Polyparium of Corallium rubrum (after 
Lacaze Duthiers). P, Polyp. 

A jelly-fish is superficially very different from a Hydra, but 
in reality it is only a hydra-like animal, the body-wall of 
which has become thickened and widened at the base of the 
tentacles into an umbrella-like disc, the mouth having become 
elongated into a central stalk. 

The second class of the Ccelenterata, which includes the 
Sea-anemones, is characterised by the fact that the stomach is 
continued into a cavity very similar to the body-cavity of the 
higher animals. This cavity remains, however, permanently 
continuous with the stomach. The cavities in the tentacles 



Digitized 



by Google 



90 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



are outgrowths from it, and it is further subdivided by means of 
partitions (mesenteries) into a number of smaller compartments. 

The Sea-anemones sometimes multiply by division, but more 
usually by producing egg cells and sperm cells on the margins 
of the mesenteries ; the egg cells from the female are passed to 
the exterior by the mouth, they then become fertilised by the 
spermatozoa which have been discharged in a similar manner 
by the male, and then develop into new animals. 

In many members of this class, coral is produced by the 
activity of the ectoderm cells. The organ pipe corals (Tubipord), 
the ordinary red coral (Corallium rubruni), the brain coral 
(Mceandrina), and the coral reefs of warm seas (Madrepora, 
Astroea, etc.) are built up by these animals. 



Vermes (worms). — All worms are elongated soft-bodied 
animals, either segmented or unsegmented. In the former 
case the segments form a chain (Tape-worm, Leech, and 
Earth-worm, etc.). Most forms possess a nervous system, 
consisting of a mass of nerve cells (cerebral ganglia) on the 
dorsal surface of the pharynx, two nerve commissures sur- 
rounding the pharynx, and a single or double nerve cord 
extending backwards along the ventral surface of the animal 
underneath the alimentary canal. All worms possess a system of 
water-vascular tubes (nephridia). In some, as in the Leech and 
Earth-worm, they form segmental organs (nephridia); in others, 
as in the Tape-worms, they are canals extending throughout 
the body. Blood vessels are frequently present, as in the 
Earth-worm and Leech, in both of which the plasma is coloured 
red by the haemoglobin, which is diffused through it. In 
none of these forms is there a true heart. These animals 
are evidently much more complex than the Ccelenterata ; the 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 91 



three primitive layers (epiblast, mesoblast, and hypoblast) are 
all developed in the embryo, and from them are derived all 
the complex structures (muscles, nerves, connective tissue, 
glands, etc.) which are present in their bodies. 

Some worms are aquatic, living in either salt or fresh water, 
some are terrestrial, and some are parasitic. The most im- 
portant are classed as Flat worms (Plathelminthes), Bound 
worms (Nemathelminthes), and Kinged worms (Annelids). 

The Flat worms include the simple, unsegmented, ciliated 
Turbeliarians, which live in sea or fresh water, or in damp 
earth ; the Trematodes, of which the Liver-fluke is a good 
example, and the Cestodes or Tape-worms. All the Trematodes 
and Cestodes are parasitic ; the former includes, in addition to 
the Liver-fluke, numerous species which are parasitic upon 
frogs and fishes, and also the Distomum haematobium or Bilharzia 
haematobia. The cercariae of this animal may be taken in by 
man in drinking water. When this happens they mature 
quickly ; they then pass out from the stomach and make their 
way into the coats of the bladder and ureter, or sometimes 
into the kidneys, the liver, or the walls of the bowel, setting up 
inflammation in these organs, and giving rise to the disease 
known as endemic hematuria. The sexes are distinct, but the 
male carries the female about with him, she being inserted in 
a groove called the gynaecophoric canal. 

The eggs find their way from the final host into water. They then 
develop into ciliated embryos, which probably make their way into the 
body of some small aquatic animal where they most likely grow into rediae. 
These rediae then give birth to cercariae, which are found in large numbers 
in the rivers of countries like Natal and Abyssinia, where the disease known 
as endemic hsematuria is common. The cercariae may be taken in with 
drinking water, or, as it is supposed, they may make their way through the 
urethra directly to the bladder of their final host whilst he is bathing. After 
reaching the bladder, they bore their way into the deepe coats. If they are 



Digitized 



by Google 



92 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



taken into the stomach, they bore their way into the intestinal blood vessels, 
and then pass with the blood to the organs in which they make their final 
home. They then grow into adult animals, and produce large numbers of 
eggs, which pass out of the body of their final host with the urine. The 
life history of these animals has not been completely worked out, the redia 
stage not having been so far observed . 

In some Cestodes the body consists of only one joint, with 
a single set of hermaphrodite reproductive organs ; in others 




Fig. 59.— Distomum haematobium (Bilharzia hcematobid). Male g and female $> , 
the latter being in the gynaecophoric canal of the former; 5, sucker (from 
Claus). 

there are several sets, but only incomplete formation of 
segments, and in yet others, as in the ordinary Tape-worm, the 
segmentation is well marked. 

Of the next group, the Nemertine3 or Ribbon worms, the 
greater number live in the sea. They are unsegmented, the 
surface of the body is provided with cilia, and at the anterior 
end of the body there is a proboscis, often provided with 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 



93 



spines, which can be thrown out for purposes of attack or 
defence. They are provided with cerebral ganglia and two 




Fig. 60. — Lumbricus rubellus (after Eisen). a, the whole "Worm ; CI, clitellum ; 
b, anterior end of the body from the ventral side ; c, isolated seta. 

lateral nerve cords, a blood vascular system, a pair of nephridia, 
simple reproductive organs, and a characteristic ciliated pit, 
possibly respiratory in function, on either side of the head. 



Digitized 



by Google 



94 ELEMENTAR Y BIO LOG V. 



The next class of worms, the Nematodes or Round worms, 
includes numerous parasites upon Man and other animals. 

The Ringed worms or Annelids include a large number of 
forms which are divided into two classes, the Chsetopoda or 
Bristle-bearing worms, and the Hirudinea or Leeches, the 
former being subdivided into the Oligochseta (or Earth-worms), 
the Polychseta which are Marine worms, and the Echiuridse. 

The Earth-worm (figs. 60 and 61), is a good example of the 
Oligochseta ; it is segmented, and provided with an alimentary 
canal, consisting of a buccal cavity, a muscular pharynx, an 
oesophagus, a crop, a gizzard, and a long intestine, surrounded 
by so-called hepatic cells. There is a well-developed blood 
vascular system, consisting of longitudinal vessels, which are 
connected together by numerous lateral branches. A well- 
developed body-cavity or ccelom is present, which has opening 
into it a series of segmental organs (nephridia) ; these nephridia 
or renal organs open to the exterior, and form looped tubes 
which lie freely in the body-cavity, their internal openings 
forming ciliated funnels. Respiration is carried on by the 
whole surface of the body, the blood vessels coming close to 
the surface, and sending branches up between the bases of the 
epidermal cells. The whole surface of the body is sensitive to 
light, but there are no definite sense organs. The nervous 
system consists of cerebral ganglia, nerve commissures around 
the pharynx, and a single nerve cord running beneath the 
alimentary canal. This cord is slightly swollen in each segment 
to form ganglia, and from these ganglia nerve branches are 
given off to the body-walls, etc. 

The Reproductive organs. — There are two pairs of minute 
testes, which are enclosed within sacs, the seminal vesicles. 
The spermatozoa undergo part of their development within 
these sacs, before they are passed to the exterior through the 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 



95 



male seminal ducts (vasa deferentia). They are passed from 
one worm direct into small sacs (the spermathecae, or receptacula 
seminis) of another worm, for though the worm is hermaphrodite 
it never fertilises itself. 

There are also two ovaries, which drop the eggs as soon 
as they are ripe into the mouths of a pair of oviducts ; they 
then collect in two small reservoirs attached to the oviducts 



Q] 



'fiftMt&SMra 


! 1 


' • "ri" 




i— -1 


0tM 






v fT 


) — Vd 


Mi 

fttmnm7nma6 


■M 




f\\ 


) 


T 


Lii 


• 



Fig. 6 i. —Generative organs of Lumbricus (after Hering). T, testes ; Sf, the two 
funnels of the vas deferens on either side ; Vd f vas deferens ; Ov, ovary ; 
Od, oviduct ; Re, receptacula seminis. 

(the receptacula ovorum), and are finally discharged into a 
gelatinous substance secreted by the epidermal cells of the 
worm at one part of its body. At the same time the sper- 
mathecae discharge the packets of spermatozoa (spermatophores) 
which they have received from another worm, and fertilisation 
thus takes place outside the body of the animal. Earth-worms 
are exceedingly numerous, Darwin having calculated that as 
many as 53,000 worms may occur in a single acre of ground. 



Digitized 



by Google 



96 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

They swallow earth in large quantities, extract the nourishment 
it contains, and then pass it out in the form of worm-casts on 
the surface. They are thus of the greatest importance in 
breaking up the soil, and so preventing the formation of a hard 
crust on the surface, which would eventually, but for their 
activity, become more or less impervious to air and moisture. 

The Polychaeta, of which the Lob-worm {Arenicola pis- 
catorum) is a good example, live in the sea, and have similar 
habits to the Earth-worm. The Lob-worm burrows in the sand, 
the worm-castings, so constantly seen on sandy beaches from 
which the tide has receded, being produced by this animal. 
It is from eight inches to a foot in length ; and is provided with 
thirteen pairs of gills, which are thread-like processes projecting 
from the body and containing blood vessels. These are the 
Tespiratory organs. The Bonellia viridis, living in holes in 
rocks, belongs to the Echiuridae ; the female is of a bright 
green colour, and is well developed, but the male is a minute 
organism without either mouth or alimentary canal, and lives 
as a parasite upon or in the female. 

The Hirudinea include the different species of Leeches ; 
they are usually small, but the Giant leech is said sometimes 
,to measure two and a half feet in length. They mostly live in 
pools or marshes, but some live on dry land or in the earth. 
The Medicinal leech forms a good example of this class. 

Allied to the Annelids are the Arrow- worms (Sagitta) and the Rotifers 
< Wheel animalcules). The latter are very abundant in fresh water ; they 
are probably degenerate animals, and are of comparatively simple structure. 
The appearance of a rotating wheel, from which they derive their name of 
Jt Wheel animalcules," is produced by the rapid movements of the cilia on 
.their anterior ends. 



Echinodermata. — This class includes the Sea-cucumbers, Sea- 
t urchins, and Starfishes, all of which live in the sea. 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 



97 



In these animals there is an alimentary canal, a body-cavity, 
a simple nervous system, pigmented masses of cells sensitive 
to light (eyes), a blood vascular system, and a well-developed 
water vascular system. The water vascular system is con 




Fig. 62.- 



-Echinaster sentus, from the oral surface (after Agassiz). 
O, Mouth ; Af t ambulacral feet. 



nected with locomotion, a condition peculiar to this class. If 
a Starfish be observed whilst it is moving about in the water, 
it will be seen that from the ventral surface of each ray of the 
star a very large number of small tube-like feet (pedicelli) 
are protruded. First, their terminal ends are fixed to the 

7 



Digitized 



by Google 



y8 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



surface of the rock on which the animal is crawling ; they then 
become shortened, with the result that the animal is slowly 
moved on. The tubular feet are protruded by water being 
poured into them from above ; then as soon as the feet are 
applied to the surface of rock, etc., the water is withdrawn, 







Fig. 63.— Diagrammatic representation of the water vascular system of a Starfish 
(from Claus). Re, circular vessel ; Ap, ampullae or Polian vesicles ; Stc t stone 
canal ; M, madreporic plate ; P, ambulacral feet connected with the branches 
of the radial canals; Ap\ the ampullae of the same. 

with the result that the feet act like suckers and their ends 
form fixed points for the animal to draw itself up to. The 
water vascular system is complicated, but briefly it consists of 
the following parts : a perforated plate (madreporic plate) on the 
surface of the animal, a canal with calcareous walls (stone 
canal), and a circular vessel surrounding the mouth ; this 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 99 



latter has in connection with it vesicles (ampullae or Polian 
vesicles), and opening from it are five radial canals, which run 
along the arms and open into the tube feet ; at the bases of 
the tube feet there are small swellings or ampullae into which 
the water, that is returned from the tube feet, flows. 

Calcareous skeleton. — In the deeper layers of the skin in 
most forms lime salts are deposited, giving to the animal a 
definite shape, and providing it with a very complicated 
exoskeleton of plates and spines. In connection with the 
exoskeleton of the Starfish and Sea-urchin, on the dorsal 
surface of the former and around the mouth of the latter, there 
are modified movable spines, the pedicellariae, which are of 
use in seizing food. The muscular system is only slightly 
developed in most Echinoderms. In the Sea-cucumbers, how- 
ever (Holothuroidea), in which the calcareous plates of the 
skin are small and insignificant, and which are therefore rather 
soft-bodied, and in the brittle stars (Ophiuroidea) where the 
water vascular system has no locomotor function, the muscular 
system is well developed. 

The Nervous system is simple, consisting of a ring around 
the mouth with nerves extending from it along the arms, and 
a superficial network of fibres and cells lying beneath the 
ectoderm. Nerves are also given off to the feet to the " eyes," 
when present, and in the Sea-cucumbers to the tentacles around 
the mouth. In the Crinoidea (Feather-stars) the nervous 
system is double. 

The Alimentary system is also simple. In some cases it 
ends blindly, but generally there is both mouth and anus. The 
mouth is ventral, and the anus dorsal in the Starfishes and 
Sea-urchins. In the Brittle-star there is no anus, and in the 
Feather-star the mouth and anus are close together. In the 
Starfishes prolongations from the stomach extend into the 



Digitized 



by Google 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 



arms, each of which has on it two pouches provided with 
digestive glands. In the Sea-urchins the mouth is provided 
with a complicated masticating apparatus (Aristotle's lantern) 
which serves to crush the food. In the Sea-cucumbers the 
posterior portion of the intestine is dilated, and gives off a 
pair of much-branched organs, the so-called "respiratory 
trees." In the Feather-stars the food canal is ciliated. 

The Blood vascular system in the Sea-cucumbers is very 
indefinite, consisting of spaces only. In the other forms there 
are one or more vascular rings, from which branches pass to 
the various organs of the body, and also a collection of blood 
vessels, the plexiform organ, by the side of the stone canal. 

The Eespiratory system. — Starfishes and Sea-urchins breathe 
by means of outgrowths from the skin which hang freely in 
the water, and into which the body-cavity extends. The 
fluid in the body-cavity contains brown pigmented cells, 
which seem to be capable of absorbing oxygen. As the body 
is so continually being washed through by the water, it is not 
improbable that it partly obtains its oxygen from the water 
which passes through the water vascular system. 

Excretory system. — The water vascular system probably 
functions as an excretory system. 

Reproductive system. — The sexes are usually separate, the 
ovaries and testes resemble each other in external appearance, 
only differing in their products ; they open by ducts to the 
exterior. The fertilised egg cell develops into a free swimming 
larva which does not grow directly into the adult. The adult 
grows as it were inside the larva, appropriating to itself such 
of the larval structures as will be of use to it in its adult 
condition, and casting off the rest. During this process the 
bilateral symmetry of the larva becomes changed into the 
radial symmetry of the adult. 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 



Many Echinoderms possess, to a marked degree, the power 
of reproducing parts which have become detached. Thus, a 
Starfish will reproduce a lost arm; and a Sea-cucumber, if 




Fig. 64. — Developmental stages of Comatula (Antedoti) (after Thomson), a, free 
swimming larva with tuft and rings of cilia {Wr\ also with rudimentary 
calcareous plates; b t attached Pentacrinoid form of the same animal; c, older 
stage. 

attacked, may eject its viscera, escape, and grow new viscera 
again. 

The Starfishes live for the most part at the bottom of the sea, 
and feed chiefly upon small animals ; the Sea-urchins, on the 



Digitized 



by Google 



io2 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



other hand, feed chiefly upon seaweeds, which they crush by 
means of their masticatory apparatus. The Sea-cucumbers 
move about chiefly by contracting their muscular bodies ; they 
live for the most part upon small animals which in some cases 
they catch with their waving tentacles. 

The Brittle-stars move about in a wriggling fashion by con- 
tracting their muscular arms. Most of the Feather-stars, on the 
other hand, are fixed either permanently or temporarily by a 
jointed stalk, while others are free swimming. 



Arthropoda are bilaterally symmetrical animals with jointed 
appendages and segmented bodies. They never possess cilia. 
Five classes are distinguished — 

1. Crustacea, including Crabs, Lobsters, Water-fleas. 

2. Protracheata. 

3. Myriapoda, including Centipedes and Millipedes. 

4. Insecta, including Ants, Butterflies, Flies, Beetles, etc. 

5. Arachnoidea, including Spiders, Mites, and Scorpions 
Crustaceans. — This large class includes such diverse animals 

as Crabs, Lobsters, Shrimps, Water-fleas, Woodlice, and 
Barnacles. They resemble each other in having jointed 
appendages, well-developed sensory organs, eyes, a more or 
less distinctly segmented body, a simple alimentary canal, and 
a horny exoskeleton, which is derived from the ectoderm, and 
which is generally more or less calcified. Some forms have 
auditory and olfactory organs. 

In addition to the active well- developed forms there are over seven 
hundred species of parasitic Crustaceans ; these, as is general with parasites, 
are more or less degenerate, sometimes consisting, as in Sacculina, of. 
hardly anything but a sac of reproductive organs. In its embryonic con- 
dition this animal is similar to the embryo of many other Crustaceans 
having well-developed appendages, and swimming actively about. 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 



103 



Most Crustaceans live in water, but a few, such as Woodlice, 
live on dry land. In most cases the body can be divided into 
a head with five pairs of appendages, a thorax bearing appen- 
dages, and an abdomen with or without appendages. The 




Fig. 65. — a, Sacculina purpurea (after M tiller); Oe % aperture of the mantle sac 
IV, root-like processes ; K, genital aperture, b, Nauplius larva of Sacculina ; 
A\ A", Md/ f appendages. c t pupa of Lernaeodiscus porcellanae (after Muller) ; 
F, the six pairs of legs ; A b, abdomen ; A', attaching antennae ; O, eye. 

calcareous covering of the anterior region, including head and 
thorax (cephalo-thorax), is frequently unsegmented, whereas 
that of the abdomen is usually divided into segments, which 
are movable on each other. When the abdomen bears 
appendages these are not infrequently modified for swimming 
purposes. The blood vascular system is but ill developed in 



Digitized 



by Google 



io4 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



the lower forms ; in the higher forms there is, however, a heart, 
arteries, and venous sinuses. In the Crayfish, for instance, the 
dorsal heart pumps blood through the arteries to the different 
organs and tissues ; the blood is re-collected from these into 
sinuses, and through them passes to vessels in the gills. Here 
it is aerated, and then sent on to a space (the pericardial 
sinus) in which the heart lies. From the pericardial sinus it 




f " r 



Fig. 66.— Longitudinal section through the Crayfish (Astacus fluviatilis) (after 
Huxley). C, heart ; Ac, cephalic aorta ; Aa, abdominal aorta, the sternal artery 
(57a) is given off close to its origin; Km, gastric mill ; D, intestine; L, liver; 
T, testis; Vd t vas deferens; Go, genital opening; G, brain; N, nerve cord; S/ t 
appendage of telson. 

passes into the heart through valvular apertures in the cardiac 
wall. 

The Respiratory organs vary considerably. In some of the 
lower forms aeration of the blood takes place as it courses 
under the skin ; in others, water passes in and out of the 
anus, forming a condition of anal respiration ; in the higher 
forms there are usually definite gill filaments. 

Most Crustaceans are active in their movements, but a few 
(Barnacles, Acorn-shells, etc.) are fixed upon logs of wood, 
rocks, etc., and many of the degenerate parasites lead a very 
passive adult life. 



Digitized 



by Google 



1NVERTEBRATA. 105 



Many Crustaceans conceal themselves in a growth of seaweed, sponge, 
etc., in the tunic of an animal like the Sea-squirt or in the shell of some 
mollusc (Hermit-crab in shell of a Gasteropod). 

In other species the real form is often obscured by the development of 
shields (Apus) and shells (Water-fleas, Barnacles). 

The development of the Crustacea is very interesting. In 
most forms a series of metamorphoses take place after the 
animal quits the egg. Some, like the Penaus, a species of 
shrimp, have a very complicated life history. After fertilisation 
and segmentation, the embryo develops into a Nauplius which, 
after a short period, moults and develops into a Zooea, a 
very different looking animal from the Nauplius. After a brief 
interval a further moulting and development takes place, with 
the result that the Mysis stage is reached; this again has a 
last moult, and the adult Penseus is produced. The Lobster 
starts life at the Mysis stage ; and the Crayfish is born as a 
Crayfish, only differing from its parent in size. 

The lower Crustaceans (Entomostracd) usually start life in 
the Nauplius form, but stop short soon after, the adult not 
being very unlike the Nauplius; while the higher forms 
{Malacostracd) do not, as a rule, pass through the Nauplius 
stage at all, but quit the egg at a higher level, such as the 
Zooea stage (Crabs), or the Mysis stage (Lobsters). 

The remaining Arthropods, namely, the Protracheata, 
Myriapoda, Insecta, and Arachnoidea, are included under the 
common name of Tracheata. 

Most of the Tracheata live either on land or in the air ; but 
in many cases, part, and in a few, the whole of the life is spent 
in the water. Respiration is carried on by a system of air 
tubes or tracheae, which are usually distributed through the 
body ; but sometimes, as in scorpions, they are collected in 
special chambers (pulmonary sacs). Spiders have both pul- 
monary sacs {fantrachece, or lungs) and ramified tracheae. 



Digitized 



by Google 



io6 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

The Protracheata are represented by the single genus Peripatus. The 
Peripatus is a worm-like animal, possessing tracheae, a series of excretory 
tubes or nephridia, a soft body, stump-like legs, a well-developed mus- 
cular system, which consists chiefly of unstriped fibres (whereas in most 
Arthopods the muscles are striated), a dorsal brain, and two lateral-ventral 
nerve cords, an alimentary canal into which numerous glands open, and a 
simple circulatory system. 

It will be seen by the above description that Peripatus forms a sort of 
connecting link between ringed worms (Annelids) and Tracheate Artho- 
poda. 




Fig. 67. — Gryllus campestris g (regne animal). 

Myriapoda (Centipedes and Millipedes) resemble worms in 
form, but they are provided with numerous jointed appendages. 
In other points their structure resembles that of the next class 
(Insecta). The Centipedes are poisonous and carnivorous, 
whilst the Millipedes are harmless vegetable feeders. 

Insecta. — This class comprises an enormous number of 
species ; it has been stated that there are about two million 
species of living animals, and that nearly half of these belong 
to the Insecta. The majority have wings and the power of 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 



107 



true flight, and are provided with a large number of air spaces 
or tubes (tracheae) within their bodies. They are mostly very 




Fig. 68.— Digestive apparatus of Apis mellifica (Honey bee) (after Le*on Dufour). 
Sp, salivary glands; Oe, oesophagus with crop like dilatation; M, chylific 
ventricle ; Re, Malpighian tubes ; R, rectum with rectal glands ; G.Dr, poison 
glands. 

active and brightly coloured, and have well-developed nervous 
systems and Sensory organs. Their bodies are segmented, and 



Digitized 



by Google 



io8 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



are divided into the head, which bears a pair of outgrowths, 
the antennas, and three pairs of appendages; the thorax, 
divided into pro-, meso-, and meta-thorax, each bearing a pair 
of legs ; and the abdomen, usually destitute of appendages. 
The appendages are all jointed. The wings are borne upon 
the meso- and meta-thorax, and are flattened sacs, moved by 
muscles, and possessing veins or nervures, which consist of 
tracheae, nerves, and outgrowths from the body-cavity. Many 
Insects, however, like Lice and Fleas, do not possess wings. 
The movements of the wings are usually very rapid ; those of 
the Fly, for instance, give about 330 strokes per second. 
The skin forms a chitinous investment to the body. The 
muscles are of the striated variety. The cerebral ganglia, 
the double ventral nerve chain of ganglia, and the sense organs 
are all well developed ; the eyes are made up of a number of 
elements, each one consisting of a corneal facet, a lens-like 
structure, and a nerve end organ. Sounds are produced by 
the rapidly moving wings, as in Flies; by the legs scraping 
against the body, as in Grasshoppers, and in some other forms 
by complicated special structures. Their food is very various, 
comprising leaves, honey, seeds, blood, wood, and flesh. The 
alimentary system is usually made up of a mouth-cavity, with 
salivary glands, a pharynx, an (esophagus, a crop or gizzard, 
a mid-gut (mesenteron), with digestive glands opening into 
it, and a hind-gut. The respiratory system consists of 
branching air tubes, the air being pumped in and out by the 
panting movements of the animal. 

In the larvsB which live in water, the tracheal system is closed, and 
they breathe during their larval state, either by gills, containing tracheae, 
which grow out from the sides of the abdomen, or through the anus (anal 
respiration). 

The Circulatory system is simple, for owing to the ease with 

Digitized byCjOOQl€ 



INVERTEBRATA. 



109 



which oxygen can get to the tissues through the branched 
tracheae, it is unnecessary that the blood should function as an 




Fig. 69.-0, larva of Ephemera with seven pairs of tracheal gills (A7) ; Tk t an 
isolated tracheal gill ; b, tracheal system of an Agrion larva ; Tst, tracheal 
trunk ; Na, accessory eyes (after Claus and Dufour). 

oxygen carrier ; the heart is a long tubular organ, lying in a 
pericardium in the dorsal region, and it as a rule pumps the 



Digitized 



by Google 



i/o ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



blood into lacunar spaces. The blood may be colourless, 
yellow, red, or greenish. 

The Excretory system consists of numerous thread-like 
processes from the hind-gut (see fig. 68, p. 107) which ramify 
amongst the organs, and which have been shown to contain 
uric acid Malpighian tubes. 

Reproductive system. — The sexes are always distinct, and as 
a rule the females are longer, less active, and quieter in their 
colours than the males, from which they often further differ in 
not possessing wings. In the male there are paired testes, two 
ducts (vasa deferentia) which usually join together to form a 
single ejaculatory duct, one or two seminal vesicles for stor- 
ing spermatozoa, accessory glands, and sometimes a copulatory 
organ (penis). In the female there are paired ovaries, two 
oviducts, generally a single vagina into which the oviducts 
open, a receptaculum seminis for storing spermatozoa, received 
from a male during copulation, and accessory genital glands. 

Metamorphosis of insects. — Just as Crustaceans usually pass 
through one or more larval stages (Nauplius, Zooea, Mysis 
stages) before arriving at maturity, so also Insects generally have 
larvae more or less dissimilar from the parent. 

In many cases, however, the young only differ from their 
parents in not being sexually mature, in the absence of wings in 
winged forms, and in size. This is the case with Cockroaches, 
Earwigs, Lice, Green-fly (Aphides), Bugs, and some other 
Insects. 

In Mayflies, Dragon-flies, etc., the larvae are aquatic; they have closed 
tracheal apertures, and in most cases breathe by gills. In the Mayfly 
(Ephemeridae) the larva has well-developed jaws, and feeds upon other 
Insects ; it moults frequently, in some cases as many as twenty times during 
the larval stage, and during the last one or two moults, the larval structures 
become gradually absorbed and replaced by the structures special to the 
adult. Its aerial existence is very short, lasting only a few hours ; whereas 
the larval stage "extends over two years or more. The adult stage is 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 



in 



entirely devoted to the business of reproduction, the mouth parts being 
only rudimentary and no nourishment being taken in. The Dragon-flies, 
on the contrary, feed during both their larval and adult stages. 

In the large majority of Insects (Flies, Fleas, Butterflies, 
Moths, Beetles, Ants, Bees, etc.), there is a true metamorphosis ; 
the egg develops into a larva (maggot, grub, or caterpillar) 
which does not bear any resemblance in appearance or habits 
to the adult. The larval stage is essentially a feeding stage ; 
nourishment is taken up in large quantity, until the animal 




Fig. 70.— Formica herculanea (an Ant) (from Claus). a, female ; b, male ; c, worker ; 
d, larva of Formica rufa ; e t pupa with case ; f t g, pupa liberated from the case. 

becomes enormously fat; it then becomes quiescent, often 
in a cocoon, as a pupa, nymph, or chrysalis. During this 
apparently quiescent stage, the greater part of the body is 
reconstructed ; in winged forms wings bud out, 'adult append- 
ages appear, colours are developed, the body alters its shape, 
the internal organs become modified, then when all these 
changes have taken place the adult animal emerges as an 
imago. The male imago produces spermatozoa, the female 
eggs, and so the life history is repeated. Most Insects 



Digitized 



by Google 



1 12 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 

only have a short adult stage, and usually are very prolific ; if 
any species is to be perpetuated it is necessary that a very 
large number of eggs should be produced, for the complicated 
metamorphosis, during which reproduction does not of course 
occur, renders the animal peculiarly liable to have its life cut 
short. The necessity for storing up nourishment in readiness 
for the pupa stage, in itself makes the caterpillar, etc., peculiarly 
attractive to birds or other animals. 

As far as possible to make up for this risk, many Insects, during either 
their larval or imago stages, take on various forms of protective adaptation, 
" walking leaves," " walking sticks," etc; thus some that live on leaves are 
so similar in colour and appearance to them, that they may readily be 
overlooked. Some are well provided with weapons of defence, stings, 
biting organs, etc. ; others, again, develop an unpleasant odour or taste, 
which makes them noxious to predatory animals. 

A considerable number of Insects are parasitic, either as 
adults (Fleas, Lice, etc.) or as larvae (maggots of Gadflies in 
cattle, boring larvae in plants, etc.). 

Many Insects do an enormous amount of damage, if their 
numbers are large, such as Locusts on crops, Phylloxera to the 
grape-vine, Green-fly to roses, etc. ; others again cause much 
irritation to their hosts (Fleas, Lice, etc.). 

Arachnoidea. — This class includes Spiders, Scorpions, Mites, 
the King-crab (Limulus), and the Sea-spiders (Pycnogonidae). 

Arachnoidea, in most cases, can be at once distinguished from 
Insecta, in that, instead of there being three pairs of walking 
legs, there are four pairs. There are no appendages corre- 
sponding to the antennae in Insects, nor as a rule have the 
abdominal segments any. 

Scorpions have an unsegmented fused head and thorax 
(cephalo-thorax), an abdomen with twelve segments, and a well- 
developed stinging organ, containing venom, at the tip of the 
tail. The respiratory organs consist of chambered tracheae 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVER TEBRA TA. 



"3 



(lung books). The heart lies dorsally, and consists of eight 
chambers. 

The Spiders form an order containing a large number of 

members. Many form webs, and in that case are provided 

at the posterior part of the abdomen with glands (spinning 

glands), from the tubes of which a viscid material can be 

a 




*ig. 71. — female spiders (trom Ulaus). 

squeezed out. The animal, after pressing the openings of the 

tubes against the surface from which it is going to spin its 

web, moves away, with the result that the viscid material is 

drawn out into fine threads which are united together to form 

a single cord; the legs aid in extending and guiding the 

thread. The spider uses these threads, not only for forming a 

web, but also for lining its nest, and for forming a cocoon for 

its eggs. 

8 



Digitized 



by Google 



ii 4 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



The male spider is usually only about one-thirteenth the size of the 
female, and it often has considerable difficulty in depositing its spermatozoa 
in the vagina of the female, for if in any way it fails to please its mate, 
the latter attacks it, and, unless it is very agile in getting out of the way, 
kills it. 

Spiders usually live upon insects which they catch in their 
webs and then suck " the juices " from out their bodies. The 
body consists of an unsegmented cephalo-thorax, an unseg- 



Fig. 72.— Demodex folliculorum (after Megnin). Kt, Pedipalp. 

mented abdomen, and a narrow connecting part between them. 
Behind the gullet, there is generally a well-developed suctorial 
apparatus. The respiratory tracheae are chiefly collected in 
chambers (the pulmonary sacs), but in addition in most forms 
there are tubular tracheae. 

Mites are very small Arachnoids, which are either parasitic 
or obtain their food from organic matters. The Itch-mite 
.(Acarus scabei or Sarcoptes hominis), occurs as an external 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 



ll S 



parasite on man. The Demodex folliculorum occurs very 
frequently in the sebaceous glands of man, especially in those 
in the skin of the nose. Gall-mites are not uncommon in 
plants. Harvest-mites also belong to this class. 




Fig. 73.— Pentastoraum denticulatum (from Claus). O, mouth ; H/ t the four 
hooks ; D, intestine ; A t anus. 

Pentastomata, which are also parasitic Arachnoids, are worm- 
like in form ; their final host is usually the dog or the wolf, while 
their intermediate host is the rabbit or the hare. 

The King-crab (Limulus) belongs to the Arachnoidea, differ- 
ing very much in size, general appearance, and habitat from 



Digitized 



by Google 



n6 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

other members of the class. It has a large cephalo-thorax, an 
abdomen ending in a long spine, and five pairs of walking legs- 
It breathes by means of plate-like gills borne upon appendages. 



The Mollusca consist of three great classes — the Lamelli- 
branchiata (Bivalved molluscs), the Gasteropoda (Snails), and 
the Cephalopoda (Cuttle-fishes). 

The majority of this class are marine animals, but some live 
in fresh water and many on land. Whilst the Bivalves live 
upon minute animals, the Snails are vegetarians, and the 
Cuttle-fish are carnivors. Again, Bivalves are almost always 
very sluggish in their movements, Snails are deliberate, and 
Cuttle-fish are exceedingly active. 

Lamellibranchiata (Bivalves). — If the ordinary fresh-water 
Mussel (Anodonta Cygnea) be examined, it will be seen to be 
enclosed in a shell with two valves. This shell is composed 
chiefly of carbonate of lime, and is formed partly by the free 
surface of the whole of the integument, but chiefly by the free 
edges of the two mantle lobes which are beneath the shell y 
and which envelope the rest of the body as with a mantle. 
The main part of the body lies in the upper part of the 
chamber formed by the two lobes of the mantle. Project- 
ing from the body is a large muscular organ, the foot, by 
means of which the animal can slowly crawl about. The 
head region is very slightly developed, there being no 
distinct part to which the name of head can fairly be given. 
On the ventral surface of this region there is an opening, the 
mouth ; this leads into the stomach. Opening out from the 
stomach is the intestine ; this passes down into the foot ; it there 
forms three loops, and then runs up again into the body ; 
it then turns back, passes through a chamber representing the 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 



117 



body-cavity (the pericardium), and finally opens into a space 
at the posterior end of the ainmal (the cloaca). On either 
side of the stomach and opening into it are glandular organs, 
the digestive glands. Eespiration is effected partly by means 
of the inner surface of the mantle, and partly by special plate- 




Fig. 74.— Swan mussel {Anodon) (after Kober). O, mouth; A, anus ; K, gills ; 
P, foot ; Se t labial palps ; Gg, cerebral ganglion ; Pg, pedal ganglion ; Vg, 
splanchnic ganglion ; G, generative gland ; Oe' t external opening of kidney ; 
Oe", opening of generative gland. 

like organs, the gills ; these hang down from the body between 
it and the foot, there being two on each side. Water passes in 
at the posterior end of the animal, below the junction of the 
two inner gills, by means of the inhalent siphon, carrying 
with it food substances. The ciliated cells on the surfaces of 
the gills and mantle lobes keep up a current of water, which 



Digitized 



by Google 



n8 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



passes around the mouth, and then up into spaces above the 
gills, and out again by an exhalent aperture at the posterior 
end above the gills. 

The heart lies in the pericardium, and consists of a ventricle 
encircling the intestine (rectum), and two auricles, one on either 
side of the ventricle. The ventricle pumps blood into the 
different parts of the body, and this blood eventually returns 
from the mantle lobes and from the gills into the auricles and 
so to the ventricle. 

The renal excretory organs (organs of Bojamus) are a 
pair of kidneys, each of which consists of a glandular part 
communicating with the pericardial cavity, and a muscular tube 
leading from the glandular part to the exterior. 

The Nervous system consists of three ganglia (cerebral, 
pedal, and parieto splanchnic) and connectives between them. 
The muscle is all of the smooth variety. 

The Eeproductive system consists of a pair of testes or 
ovaries, lying in the upper part of the foot, and opening to the 
exterior by apertures close to the openings of the ureters. 

The Gasteropoda include the air-breathing Snails and Slugs, 
and the aquatic Pond-snails, Periwinkles, Sea-hares (Aplysia), 
Limpets, etc. Some of these are symmetrical, in others the 
organs on the right side have, to a great extent, disappeared, 
those on the left side being well developed. 

The animals in this class have usually a single shell ; the 
head is well developed; the mouth contains a ribbon-like 
structure (radula), having a rough, rasping surface ; the foot 
is flattened except in the swimming forms, and the digestive 
organs, etc., are borne in a hump on the back. 

The land Snails breathe by means of a pulmonary chamber 
well supplied with blood vessels. In some the sexes are 
separate ; others, like the Garden-snail, are hermaphrodite. 



Digitized 



by Google 



INVERTEBRATA. 119 



The Cephalopoda (Cuttle-fishes) are symmetrical, free swim- 
ming, marine animals. Some are enclosed in shells (Nautilus) ; 
others possess only a calcareous structure (the cuttle-bone of 
Sepia), a chitinous plate (Loligo), or nothing representing the 
shell of the ancestral mollusc (Octopus). They breathe by 
gills ; their nerve-ganglia are enclosed in a cartilaginous box 
around the gullet ; their eyes are generally well developed ; the 
vascular system is well developed, and the sexes are separate. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XII. 
VERTEBRATA. 

THE Vertebrate are defined as animals which, at some 
stage of their existence, possess (i) a notochord, round 
which there is developed a sheath, which may or may not be 
replaced by a cartilaginous or bony skeleton; (2) gill-slits, 
which may or may not persist ; (3) a tubular dorsal nerve 
eord. 

Aristotle was the first to place most of the animals included under the 
name of Vertebrates together ; he described them as a class consisting of 
animals with blood ; he also considered the possession of a bony or cartila- 
ginous vertebral column to be an important characteristic. 

Linnaeus gave, as the four highest classes of his system, beasts, birds, 
reptiles, and fishes. 

Lamarck, in 1797, divided the whole animal world into two classes — 
animals with vertebrae, and animals without. Cuvier agreed with him in 
regarding the possession of vertebrae as distinguishing the Vertebrata from 
his three other great types. 

Further research soon showed that the possession of bony vertebrae, that 
is, pieces of bone jointed to form a spinal column, could not be regarded as 
a distinguishing characteristic ; for some fishes, which evidently belong to 
the class Vertebrata, do not possess a jointed bony vertebral column ; thus 
the commoner Sharks and Skates possess purely cartilaginous skeletons, 
while Sturgeons and Lampreys have no vertebrae at all, but merely a con- 
tinuous elastic rod in the place of the jointed spinal column. It was soon 
noticed that in these fishes the muscles and the connective tissue partitions 
were arranged as a series of segments attached to the sides of this elastic 
rod. It was then suggested that the presence of this segmental arrangemen 
of the muscles of the body-wall, as well as of a skeletal axis, which might be 
itself surrounded by an unsegmented connective tissue sheath, which again 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 121 

may be replaced by segmental cartilaginous or bony vertebrae, should be 
considered as the distinguishing characteristic of the Vertebrata. 

The next important feature that was observed about Vertebrata was that 
they all possess at some period of their existence, laterally placed passages 
(gill-slits) leading from the pharynx to the exterior. 

It was further shown that the great mass of nervous tissue lying dorsally 
above the spinal column, and known as the cerebro-spinal nervous system, 
or brain and spinal cord, is in all cases a tube, which originates as part of 
the dorsal surface of the embryo. This nerve tube arises in the form of a 
long groove, which becomes finally closed in by the adhesion of its opposite 
edges, a tube or canal thus being formed. 

The definition of the Vertebrata which is now accepted includes animals 
which have only recently been shown to possess at some stage of their 
existence the three above-mentioned characteristic structures. These 
animals, in their adult condition, seem to have very little in common with 
the higher Vertebrata, but as they undoubtedly possess at one stage the 
vertebrate characteristics, they must be included under the general term. 
The Vertebrata are divided into four branches — 

1 . The Craniata (Cuvierian Vertebrates). 

2. The Cephalochorda (Amphioxus). 

3. The Urochorda (Tunicata). 

4. The Hemichorda (Balanoglossus). 

It is only of the Craniata that it is necessary to speak here. 

The Craniata are Vertebrata, in which the tubular cerebro- 
spinal nerve mass is swollen anteriorly to form a brain. The 
notochord, whilst extending posteriorly to the extremity of 
the body, does not reach quite so far forward anteriorly as the 
termination of the nerve tube. Around the anterior extremity 
of the nerve cord, that is, round the brain, a cranium, or 
brain case, is developed for purposes of protection ; hence the 
name Craniata. 

The Skeleton. — The possession of an internal skeleton is of 
great importance. In the Invertebrata the firm supporting 
structures are almost always produced by the hardening and 
segmentation of the external skin. In the Vertebrata the 
relation of the hard to the soft parts of the body is reversed, 
the hard parts being placed in the interior of the body. These 



Digitized 



by Google 



122 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



hard parts send out processes towards the dorsal and ventral 
surfaces, which constitute respectively a dorsal canal for the 
reception of the central nervous system, and a ventral arch 
over the vascular trunks and the viscera. As before mentioned, 
in some of the lower vertebrates, the axial skeleton in the adult 
is only an elastic rod, which is developed around the persistent 
notochord. 

The notochord is present during embryonic life in the 
higher forms, but in the adult it becomes largely replaced 
by the bony vertebral column. The bony vertebrae develop as 
rings in the sheath of the notochord. These rings represent 
the first rudiments of the vertebral bodies, and in connection 
with them the arches are formed. 

It must be carefully borne in mind that the notochord never 
develops into the backbone. The spinal column — whether it 
consist of connective tissue as in the Amphioxus, of cartilage as 
in the Dog-fish, or of bone as in Man — is entirely formed from 
the mesoblastic sheath of the notochord, the notochord itself 
taking no share in its formation, but only forming a more or 
less persistent rod, around which it is developed. Each verte- 
bra consists of a body or centrum (in the centre of which 
remains of the notochord frequently persist), of a dorsal bony 
arch, enclosing a canal, in which the nerve cord lies, and of a 
ventral arch which, in some cases, encloses a canal in which 
blood vessels lie. In addition to the above, transverse pro- 
cesses, which project from the sides of the bodies of the 
vertebras, are developed. The ribs are bony or cartilaginous 
rods, which are developed quite independently of the vertebral 
column, and which articulate by their dorsal ends, either with 
the processes which form the ventral arch as in Fishes, or as in 
the higher forms with the transverse processes, and the bodies 
of the vertebrae themselves. 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 123 



In the anterior region of the body, as already mentioned, 
there are slits (the gill-slits) which lead from the pharynx to 
the exterior, and which persist throughout life in Fishes, but 
in air-breathing animals (such as man) only appear during 
embryonic life. They are absent in the adult, although traces 
of them can still be made out. Between the gill-slits, cartilagi- 
nous or bony rods develop in the body-wall for the purpose 
of supporting the vascular processes or gills, and of keeping 
the gill-slits open ; these rods develop on both sides of the 
animal, and their ventral ends unite together. They thus form 
a series of arches encircling the pharynx, and are known as the 
visceral arches, the whole arrangement constituting the visceral 
skeleton. 

In the air-breathing forms, as there is no longer any need of 
bringing the blood vessels in the gills into contact with large 
quantities of water, so as to enable them to obtain sufficient 
oxygen for purposes of respiration, the gills disappear, the 
visceral clefts close up, and the visceral skeleton is almost 
entirely absent. In them it is only represented (1) by the 
lower jaw apparatus, which is usually armed with teeth ; and 
(2) by some of the small bones of the ear; and (3) by the 
hyoid bone with its anterior and posterior cornua. 

In the lowest Vertebrates, the parts of the body behind the 
head may be divided into two regions. The anterior region 
or trunk contains the body-cavity, the various organs of diges- 
tion, the heart, the generative organs, etc. In the posterior 
region or tail, there is no body-cavity, and the ventral processes 
of the vertebrae (the haemapophyses) unite together to enclose 
a canal which contains the main trunks of the tail blood vessels. 
These animals propel themselves by means of movements of 
their tails. In the higher forms, the animals move about by 
the aid of paired appendages, the fore and hind legs. In the 



Digitized 



by Google 



124 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 



forms between, such as most fishes, the paired appendages are 
modified to form fins which aid locomotion, at the same time 
the vertebral column remains freely movable. 

In Snakes, which have no limbs, the ribs are freely articulated with the 
vertebral bodies, and can be moved backwards and forwards, while at the 
same time the vertebral column retains its mobility. They move partly by 
lateral flexions of the vertebral column, and partly by alternately back- 
ward and forward movements of the ribs, so that in a certain sense they 
may be said to run on the points of their ribs. 

The limbs present wide differences in general appearance ; 




K IG . 75 ._Head and anterior region of skeleton of Dog-fish (after Owen). K, body 
of vertebra : O, neural arch ; S, intercalated piece ; Pq, palato quadrate ; 
Lk, labial cartilage ; Zb, hyoid arch ; Kb y branchial arch ; Sg, shoulder girdle. 

they may have the form of legs, of wings, or of fins. In all 
cases, however, they consist of the same essential parts, the 
variation, suppression, or reduction of which determines the 
differences between them. Not only can the anterior ap- 
pendages, whether they be wings, legs, or fins, be traced to a 
common type, but the hind and front limbs are essentially 
repetitions of the same arrangement. 

There are two girdles, the Pectoral and Pelvic, with which 
the anterior and posterior appendages articulate. 

Pectoral girdle. — The girdle with which the anterior pair 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 125 



of limbs articulate is called the pectoral girdle. It consists of 
three paired pieces ; two dorsal portions, the shoulder blades 
or scapulae, and four ventral portions, the anterior or 
praecoracoids (in Man only represented by ligaments with 
which the clavicle becomes joined), and the posterior or 
coracoids (in man only represented by the coracoid processes). 
It is at the junction of the three portions of either side (the 
scapula, the prsecoracoid, and the coracoid), that the glenoid 
cavity occurs for the articulation of the humerus with the 
girdle. 

Pelvic girdle. — The posterior, or as it is called pelvic girdle, 
is usually fused more or less completely with the vertebral 
column by means of its dorsal portions. As the posterior limbs 
usually have to support the chief weight of the body, it is 
necessary that the connection between them and the vertebral 
column should be firm and strong; this somewhat modifies 
the general appearance of the girdle. Still it is usually easy to 
make out on each side a dorsal portion, closely corresponding 
to the scapula of the pectoral girdle, called the ilium, and 
two ventral portions, corresponding to the praecoracoid and 
coracoid respectively, called the pubis and ischium. As 
in the pectoral girdle, it is at the junction of these three 
portions that the girdle articulates with its appendage on either 
side. The head of the femur fits into the acetabulum, into the 
formation of which all three bones enter. 

In the cartilaginous Fishes, such as Sharks, the girdles are exceed- 
ingly simple, the pectoral and pelvic girdles each consist of two simple 
cartilaginous arches, which unite together in the middle line ventrally. 

Anterior appendages. — The anterior limb in its simplest 
form consists of a jointed stem of cartilage, which articulates 
with the shoulder girdle. The cartilage is replaced by bone in 
all the higher forms. 



Digitized 



by Google 




Fig. 76.— Skeleton of an Egyptian vulture (from Claus). Rh> cervical ribs; 
Du, inferior spinus process ; CI, clavicle ; Co, coracoid ; Sc, scapula ; St t 
sternum ; S/c, sternocostal bones ; Pu, uncinate process of a thoracic rib ; 
y/, ilium ; Js, ischium ; Pb, pubis : H. humerus ; R, radius ; U. ulna ; 
Cj C, carpus ; Me, metacarpus ; P*, P", P"'> phalanges of the three fingers ; 
Fe, femur ; T, tibia ; F, fibula ; Tm, tarso-metatarsus ; Z, toes. 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 127 



In Fishes, the jointed rod has attached to it, on either side, 
numerous smaller rods also jointed, the whole structure being 
covered with skin and constituting a fin. 

In the higher Vertebrates, four segments, separated from each 
other by transverse joints, can be made out in the rod. These 
again may be further subdivided by longitudinal and transverse 
divisions. The first segment forms the humerus ; the second 
■consists of the radius and ulna, which are sometimes, as in the 
Frog, fused to form a single bone ; the third includes the several 
bones of the carpus or wrist joint, and the fourth contains all 
the bones of the mantis or hand. The hind limb corresponds 
closely with the fore limb, the femur corresponding to the 
humerus, the tibia and fibula to the radius and ulna, the 
tarsus or ankle joint to the carpus, and the pes or foot to 
the manus. The change in structure of the fin to a compound 
system of levers, such as is present in the higher Vertebrates, is 
due to a change in function, the swimming organ being modi- 
fied to form a flying, running, or climbing organ. 

In Birds, the fore limb is very similar to that of Man, as far 
as the humerus, radius, and ulna are concerned. The carpus is 
much reduced, the bones of the manus are much diminished in 
number, and are at the same time elongated and more or less 
fused together, so as to provide a suitable structure to support 
the wing feathers.* In flying Birds, the anterior limbs are 
always firmly attached to the shoulder girdle, which is well 
developed, and strengthened by the large clavicles. 

In Animals that use their fore limbs for running, the carpus 
and manus present various minor modifications, the bones of 
the manus being more or less fused together. 

Posterior appendages.— The hind limbs in the higher 

* There are only two separate carpals, three metacarpals fused together, 
and three digits. 



Digitized 



by Google 



128 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



vertebrates present fewer modifications than the fore limbs do, 
as they more nearly subserve the same functions in different 
forms. In Birds, half of the tarsal bones are fused with the 
tibia to form the tibio-tarsus ; the remaining tarsal and the 
metatarsal bones are also much fused together, and are generally 
much lengenthed, the bone thus formed is called the tarso- 
metatarsus, and it is due to the variations in length of this 





Fig. 77.— Skeleton of a hand of— a, Orang; b, Dog; c, Pig; d, Ox; e, Tapir; 
/, Horse (after Gegenbauer and Claus). /?, radius; U, ulna; A> scaphoid; 
B, semi-lunar ; C, cuneiform ; D t trapezium ; E, .trapezoid ; F, osmagnum ; 
G, unciform ; P, pisiform ; Cc, centrale ; M, metacarpus. 

bone, that the great difference observed in the lengths of the 
legs of different birds is caused. The fibula is in Birds rudi- 
mentary and is fused with the tibia. 

Ribs. — The ribs are bony arches developed in connection 
with the inferior processes of the vertebrae. They are usually 
articulated to the transverse processes of the vertebras. 
These bones are sometimes only short or rudimentary; but 
usually they encircle the body, and enclose many of the 
internal organs. When well developed, they may become 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 



129 



connected together on the ventral surface by means of the 
sternum. In some cases each rib consists of a bony rod 
which may be jointed or not; in other cases, as in Man, the 
ventral portion is cartilaginous, the dorsal portion being 
bony. 

The sternum varies considerably in appearance in different 
Vertebrates ; sometimes, as in Man, it is a comparatively simple 
plate of bone. In flying Birds, it is large and well developed 
with a projecting keel on the ventral surface which presents a 
large area for the attachment of the powerful muscles moving 
the wings. 




Fig. 78. — Median longitudinal section of a Sheep's skull (from Claus). Ob, basi- 
occipital ; O/, exoccipital ; Os, supraoocipital ; Pe, petrous bone ; Spb, basi- 
sphenoid; Ps, praesphenoid ; A Is, alisphenoid ; Ors, orbitosphenoid ; P 
parietal ; Fr, frontal ; Sf, frontal sinus ; Na, nasal ; C, ethmo-turbinal ; Gt f 
inferior turbinal ; Pt, pterygoid ; Pal f palatine ; Vo, vomer ; Mx, maxilla 
Jmx, prsemaxilla. 



Skull. — The skull, or brain box, is in the lower Fishes (such 
as Sharks) entirely composed of cartilage, but in all the higher 
Vertebrates the cartilage is more or less entirely replaced or 
covered in by bones. 

9 



Digitized by 



Google 



130 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

In the embryo it consists of four basal plates of cartilage — a posterior pair 
(the parachordals), with which the anterior extremity of the notochord is 
generally fused, and an anterior pair (the trabecule cranii). From these 
basal plates, processes of cartilage grow up on either side to partly enclose 
the brain. The box is completed anteriorly by the cartilaginous framework 
of the organs of smell (the olfactory capsules). Posteriorly the processes 
meet on the dorsal surface of the hinder part of the cranium, to form the 
occipital series of bones which partly roof in the cavity posteriorly. Just in 
front of the occipital segments, the framework enclosing the auditory organs 
(auditory capsule on either side) helps to complete the box. The roof of the 
box is completed by bones called membrane bones, which are not first laid 
down in cartilage, but only in membrane. In all the higher Vertebrata the 
cartilage becomes replaced by bone, and membrane bones are developed 
whenever a gap is left between the cartilage bones. The two visceral 
arches, which lie farthest forward, also assist in building up.the skull, the 
mandibular arch forming the basis of the lower jaw and of the pterygoid 
and palatine bones of the upper jaw ; and the upper part of both the hyoid 
and the mandibular arches being concerned in the formation of some of the 
bones of the ear. The lower part of the hyoid arch forms the main part of 
the hyoid bone. 

To summarise: — From the parachordals and the trabecule cranii, the 
occipital, sphenoid and ethmoid bones are formed ; the nasal sense capsules 
help to close in the skull anteriorly and laterally, whilst the auditory sense 
capsules assist in closing it in posteriorly and laterally ; the mandibular and 
hyoid arches form the lower jaw, part of the upper jaw, the hyoid bone, and 
part of the ear apparatus ; and the membrane bones fill up all the gaps 
left, the nasals, frontals, parietals forming the greater part of the roof, the 
lachrymals, squamosals, etc., forming part of the sides, the praemaxilloe, 
maxillae, etc., forming the upper jaw, and several membrane bones helping 
to complete the formation of the lower jaw. 

Integument. — The skin in Vertebrates is divided into two 
distinct layers, the epidermis, externally, which is composed 
of cells flattened on the surface and spherical in the deeper 
layers, and the true skin or corium, which is composed of 
fibrous connective tissue. The skin, muscles are in connec- 
tion with the corium. In man muscles are only slightly 
developed in connection with the skin, but in many vertebrates 
they are of considerable importance, serving to move the skin 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 131 

and its appendages. Hairs, nails, and feathers are developed 
entirely from the epidermis ; scales and teeth are partly derived 
from the epidermis and partly from the deeper structures. 

The Digestive Apparatus. — The alimentary canal is chiefly 
derived from the hypoblast, but at either end there is an 
inpushing of epiblast, forming anteriorly the mouth (stomato- 
dcenm), and posteriorly the anus (proctodeum). The teeth 
are partly derived from epiblast, but chiefly from mesoblast, the 
dentine or ivory being derived from the latter, whilst the cap 
of enamel is derived from the former. 

Teeth are not always present ; thus, in adult Birds, in Tortoises, and 
in a few low Mammals, these organs are replaced by a horny substance 
which covers the sharp edges of the jaws (beak). In some Whales the 
teeth, which have commenced to form in the embryo, become absorbed 
before birth, and horny plates (the so-called whalebone) develop as pro- 
cesses from the palate. In the poisonous Snakes there are special teeth in 
the upper jaw traversed by a groove or canal, through which the poison 
from the poison glands passes into the wounds. 

The tongue, and in the higher forms the salivary glands, are 
both associated in development with the mouth. 

The tongue is richly supplied with nerves, and functions 
largely as an organ of taste ; but in some animals, as in the 
Frog, it serves also as an organ for catching food, and in all 
animals it is of importance for the taking in of food. The 
saliva secreted by the salivary glands has a double function ; it 
converts non-diffusible starch into diffusible sugar, by means 
of a digestive ferment which it contains, and it moistens the 
food. The importance of this moistening action may be 
gathered from the negative observation of the absence of 
salivary glands in Fishes. 

The mouth leads into the pharynx, which is perforated in 
Fishes by the gill-slits, so that water taken in by the mouth can 
pass out by the gill-slits. In the higher forms, in which the 



Digitized 



by Google 



132 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



gill-slits have disappeared, the pharynx only has opening into 
it, the mouth cavity, the posterior openings of the nasal cavity, 




Fig* 79.— Digestive canal of a Bird (from Clans). Oe, utdophagus; K, crop; 
Dm , proventriculus ; K m t gizzard ; D, small intestine ; P, pancreas ; H, liver ; 
C, the two caeca ; Ad, large intestine ; U, ureter ; Ov t oviduct ; Kl, cloaca. 

and the Eustachian tubes, and opening from it are the entrances 
to the oesophagus or gullet and to the larynx. Associated 
with the pharynx in the region of the gill-slits are two organs, 
whose functions are very imperfectly understood, namely, the 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 133 



thyroid body and the thymus gland. In the adult the latter 
atrophies in the higher Vertebrates. The oesophagus or gullet, 
which varies in length according to the length of the neck, leads 
direct into the stomach. It is, as a rule, a simple tube, but in 
many Birds there is a dilatation upon it, the crop, in which the 
food is softened. The lower end of the oesophagus in these 
animals is dilated into a glandular organ, proventriculus, which 
is functionally part of the stomach, as in it the gastric juice 
is secreted. 

The stomach is a digestive organ ; it has numerous simple 
glands in its wall, which pour their secretion into its cavity. In 
Birds and in Crocodiles it is an exceedingly muscular organ, 
the muscular walls being especially thick in grain-eating Birds, 
and in these it is called the gizzard. 

The intestine is distinguished by its great length and by the 

presence of numerous folds and projections of the membrane 

lining it, the function of which is to increase the surface over 

which digestion and absorption can take place. This surface 

is still further increased in some animals (as Birds, Herbi- 

vora, etc.) by the existence of one or two tubes of varying 

length which open into the alimentary canal at the junction of 

the small and large intestine. These tubes are closed at their 

free ends and are called caeca. The length of the small 

intestine varies, being very long in vegetable feeders, shorter 

in pure animal feeders, and of medium length in omniverous 

animals, like Man. 

This variation in length is well illustrated by the Frog, the Tadpole being 
a vegetable feeder, while the adult Frog lives upon animal food, such as 
insects. In the Tadpole the intestine is exceedingly long, being coiled up 
like a watch-spring ; but as the animal grows and changes its habits, the 
intestine does not grow at the same rate, the result being that the flesh- 
eating Frog possesses a relatively short intestine. 

Opening into the small intestine are the ducts of the liver 



Digitized 



by Google 



134 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



and the pancreas ; the former is a large organ which regulates 
the composition of the blood and which pours bile into the 
intestine; the latter secretes a digestive juice. The small 
intestine opens into the large intestine, which in its turn leads 
into the rectum, which opens to the exterior by the anus.* 




Fig. 8o»— Alimentary canal of Man (from Claus). Oe, oesophagus ; Af, stomach ; 
L, spleen ; H, liver ; Gb, gall bladder ; P, pancreas ; Du, duodenum receiving 
bile and pancreatic ducts ; //, ileum ; Co, colon ; Coe, caecum with vermiform 
appendix (Pv) ; JR, rectum. 

In most of the higher Vertebrates the faeces (indigest- 
ible substances, and used-up secretions, etc.) are discharged 

* The lower part of the alimentary canal is in some animals divided into 
two parts which are called the large intestine and the rectum ; in others no 
such division can be made out, the whole being spoken of indifferently by 
cither name. 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRA! A. 135 

directly to the exterior at the anus. In some Fishes, Frogs, 
Birds, and Snakes, the rectum opens into a cloaca or common 
sewer, which receives not only the faeces but also the urinary 
excretion and genital products. The cloaca opens to the 
exterior at the anus. The position of the anus varies with the 
length of the tail ; it is always on the ventral surface, and is 
usually at the hinder part of the animal. In a few Fishes it 
opens well forward at the junction of the anterior third with 
the posterior two-thirds of the body. 

Organs of Respiration. — Special respiratory organs, either 
gills or lungs, are present in nearly all vertebrates. It is only 
in Fishes and Amphibians that gills are found. The gills in the 
lowest Fishes consist of much-folded membrane abundantly 
supplied with blood vessels. In the higher Fishes they consist 
of branchial filaments which are borne upon the visceral 
arches, and project into the visceral clefts (gill-slits).* Water 
passes freely in through the mouth and out by the gill-slits. 
The blood is aerated by the oxygen contained in the water. In 
many Fishes, an organ (the swimming bladder) arises as an out- 
growth from the alimentary canal. This is generally an unpaired 
sac which sometimes retains its connection with the alimentary 
canal by means of an air tube, the pneumatic duct, but some- 
times is only a closed sac. It is supposed to help the fish in 
altering its specific gravity, but as some fish swim very well with- 
out it, it is evidently not necessary to enable the fish to rise or 
sink in the water. In a small class of Fishes, the Dipnoi, double 
breathers or mud Fishes, the swim bladder is copiously supplied 
with blood vessels, and functions as a lung, so that these 
animals have a double system of respiratory organs. 



* The gills are often protected by a fold of skin, or by a more elaborate 
operculum. 



Digitized 



by Google 



'36 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 




Fig. 81.— Entrance to the digestive and respiratory organs of the Cat (after 
Heider). a, head ; P, parotid ; M, submaxillary and Su, sublingual salivary 
glands ; b, N, nasal aperture ; Nm, turbinal bones ; M, mouth ; Z, tongue ; 
Pa, velum palati ; Oe, oesophagus ; L, larynx ; £*, epiglottis ; Zb, hyoid ; 
Tr, trachea ; P, lung ; D, diaphragm ; T, thyroid ; B, thymus ; Tu, opening 
of Eustachian tube into pharynx ; H, cerebral hemispheres ; C, corpus callosum ; 
Cq, corpora quadragemina ; C6, cerebellum ; /?, spinal cord ; Hy, hypophysis ; 
W t vertebral column ; St, sternum ; C, larynx (L) and first part of trachea (7V) ; 
S, vocal cord ; E, epiglottis (longitudinal section). 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 137 



It appears at first sight that the swimming bladder of the fish is only a 
modified lung, but this is probably not the case. 

Lungs occur in Reptiles, Birds, Mammals, and adult Amphi- 
bians. They develop as an outgrowth of the alimentary 
canal. This outgrowth becomes completely separated off 
from the oesophagus, and at its lower end divides into two 
or more tubes, which communicate with the pharynx by a 
single tube, the trachea. The lungs, in their simplest form, 
consist of dilated sacs which are richly supplied with blood 
vessels, but in the higher Vertebrates they form spongy bodies, 
consisting of large numbers of minute air sacs or vesicles, with 
blood vessels ramifying on their walls. These air vesicles open 
by small tubes or bronchioles into larger tubes or bronchi, 
which in turn open into the trachea. In Snakes, the lung is 
nearly always much reduced in size on one side, that on the 
other side being correspondingly enlarged. In Birds, there are 
large diverticula, or air sacs, which communicate with large air 
spaces in the bones and between the muscles, so that the animal 
contains within the body a large amount of air, and thus is 
rendered as light as possible. In the higher Vertebrates (as 
Man) the lungs are freely suspended in the thorax, that is in 
the anterior portion of the body-cavity, this being shut off from 
the posterior part by a sheet of muscular and tendinous tissue, 
the diaphragm. At the upper end of the trachea or windpipe, 
just before it communicates with the pharynx, there is a vocal 
apparatus or larynx. This vocal apparatus consists of two folds 
of membrane, the edges of which can be tightened, approxi- 
mated to or separated from each other ; these are the vocal cords. 
This apparatus is well protected and rendered rigid by a car- 
tilaginous framework. In some animals the upper opening of 
the larynx (the glottis) can be more or less completely closed 
by a flaplike structure, the epiglottis. 



Digitized 



by Google 



I3» 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



In most Birds, there is a more or less complicated vocal 
apparatus placed at the lower end of the trachea, just where it 
divides into the two main bronchi (the bifurcation of the 
trachea). This vocal apparatus in Birds is called the lower 
larynx or syrinx. 

Circulatory system. — The blood of all Vertebrates is a 
fluid, in which white amoeboid corpuscles float. In addition 
to the amoeboid corpuscles the fluid (except in the lowest 




Fig. 82. — Blood corpuscles (after Ecker). a, colourless corpuscles from the Swan 
mussel ; Z>, from a Caterpillar ; c, red corpuscles from Proteus ; d, from the 
Smooth adder ; ct, lymph corpuscles of the same ; e t red corpuscles of the 
Frog ; /, of the Pigeon ; f> lymph corpuscles of the same ; g, red blood 
corpuscles of Man. 

Vertebrates) contains an enormous number of red corpuscles 
(five millions to the cubic millimetre in Man). The red 
corpuscles are usually oval nucleated discs, except in Mammals, 
where, with the exception of the Camel tribe, they are circular 
and contain no nuclei. They owe their colour to the 
haemoglobin they contain; this substance has a powerful 
affinity for oxygen which it takes up from water or air as the 
case may be, and carries to the tissues, and there gives it up 
to the protoplasm of the cells. 

The vascular system consists essentially of a closed system 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 



139 



of tubes, in one part of which is inserted a muscular organ, 
the heart, which lies in a special part of the body-cavity, the 




1 1G. 83. — Diagram of the circulatory organs of an osseous Fish. V, ventricle ; 
Ba, aortic bulb with the arterial arches which carry blood to the gills ; 
Ao, dorsal aorta formed by the vessels from the gills (Ab) \ N, kidney ; 
D y alimentary canal ; Lk, portal circulation (from Claus). 

pericardium. All vessels returning blood to the heart are 
described as veins, whilst those bearing it away from the heart 



Digitized 



by Google 



140 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



are called arteries ; these names are used quite irrespective of 
whether the blood is aerated and so bright red, or reduced and 
so dark red. 

In all Fishes, except those possessing both lungs and gills 
(the Dipnoi or double breathers), the heart possesses only two 
chambers — an auricle into which the blood from the veins 
is poured, and a ventricle which drives it on by alternate 
contractions and relaxations into the main artery. 

In most cases the large veins just at their junction with the auricle dilate 
to form a third chamber called the sinus venosus ; a fourth chamber, the 
truncus arteriosus, is similarly formed by the main artery as it leaves the 
ventricle. 

The main artery soon divides into a number of branches, 
the different gill vessels, which go to the gills ; these branches 
break up into a large number of minute tubes, the capillaries, 
which ramify in the gill plates, and thus bring the blood into 
close relationship with the oxygen in the water. The 
capillaries then collect into a small number of larger vessels, 
the efferent vessels of the gills, which, after sending off branches 
to the head, join to form a large vessel, the dorsal aorta. This 
vessel runs along the dorsal surface of the body, giving off 
branches as it proceeds to the fins, the body-walls, the alimen- 
tary canal, etc., until it ends as the caudal artery in the tail. 
Each arterial branch given off from this vessel breaks up into 
capillaries in the organ to which it goes, thus carrying aerated 
blood to every part of the organ. The capillaries re-collect to 
form veins, and these carry the non-aerated blood to the heart, 
pouring it into the auricle. In all Vertebrates the course of the 
venous blood from the greater part of the alimentary canal to 
the heart is interrupted in the liver. The blood, laden with 
the products of digestion, is brought to this organ by the 
portal vein which breaks up into capillaries so as to bring the 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 141 



blood into close relationship with the liver cells. The 
capillaries then re-collect to form large vessels, the hepatic 
veins, which carry the blood on to the heart. This is described 
as the hepatic portal circulation. 

In Fishes, Amphibia, most Reptiles, and to a less extent in 
Crocodiles, Tortoises, and Birds, most of the blood returning 
from the posterior parts of the body passes through the kidneys, 
a renal portal circulation being thus formed. The blood, as it 
passes through the kidneys, gives up its nitrogenous waste 




Ad 

Fig. 84.— Aortic arches of Tadpole (after Bergmann and Leuckart). Aa, aortic 
arches uniting into descending aorta (Ad) ; Ap, pulmonary artery ; Kg, cephalic 
arteries ; Br, gills. 

material, and this is excreted by the kidneys. It then passes 
by the renal veins into the system of large veins which carry the 
blood back to the heart. 

In animals which, like the Frog, breathe at one time by gills, 
and at another by lungs, the course of the circulation in the 
young gill-breathing stage, is similar to that above described, as 
occurring in most Fishes ; and whilst the animal breathes by 
gills only, as in the young Tadpole, this arrangement is the only 
one that exists ; but later, when the animal begins to breathe 
by lungs instead of gills, it becomes somewhat modified; 



Digitized 



by Google 



H2 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



the anterior gill arteries instead of going to the gills pass 
directly into the systemic arteries, whilst the posterior gill 
arteries instead of going to the gills pass direct to the lungs, 
and from the lungs the aerated blood is returned direct to 
the heart. At the same time the auricle becomes divided 
by a septum into two chambers — one of these, now called 
the left auricle, receives only aerated blood from the lungs; 
whilst the other, the right auricle, continues to receive the 
impure blood from the rest of the system. The ventricle 
still remains single ; it hence receives both pure (aerated) and 
impure (non-aerated) blood, and a more or less complicated 
arrangement is developed, so as to send the greater part of the 
impure blood to the lungs (and in some cases, as in the Frog, 
also to the skin) to be aerated, whilst the pure blood is sent to 
the head ; the pure and impure blood, which have unavoidably 
become mixed, going to the rest of the system. 

In most Reptiles, the ventricle is single, but it is partially 
divided by a septum into two chambers, so that only a slight 
admixture of the pure and impure blood takes place. 

In Birds and Mammals, the ventricle is completely divided 
so that the heart consists of four chambers, a right auricle and 
ventricle, and a left auricle and ventricle. The impure non- 
aerated blood all flows into the right auricle, thence to the right 
ventricle, from there it passes to the lungs where it is aerated ; 
it is then returned to the left auricle, from which it flows into 
the left ventricle. From the left ventricle it passes by means 
of the dorsal aorta to the whole of the system, being returned 
after it has given up its oxygen, and got rid of its nitrogenous 
waste products in the kidneys, etc., direct to the right auricle. 

This double system is described as the lesser or pulmonary 
circulation and greater or systemic circulation. The former 
consists of the pulmonary arteries to the lungs from the right 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 



H3 



ventricle, pulmonary capillaries in the lungs, and pulmonary 




Fig. 85.— Diagram of the circulation in an Animal with a double circulation (after 
Huxley). Ad, right auricle ; As, left auricle ; Vd t right and Vs, left ventricle ; 
Vcs, superior and Vci y inferior vena cava ; Dth, thoracic duct ; Ap, pulmonary 
artery; Vp, pulmonary vein; P, lung; Ao, aorta; D, intestine; L, liver; 
Vp\ portal vein ; Lv % hepatic vein. 

veins to the left auricle. The latter consists of the dorsal 
aorta from the left ventricle with its branches and their capillaries, 



Digitized 



by Google 



144 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



and the hepatic veins and superior and inferior venae cavae, all 
of which open into the right auricle. 

Lymphatic system. — Lymph is a colourless fluid in which the 
colourless lymph corpuscles float. The lymphatic system is a 
subdivision of the general circulatory system, and is essentially 
a drainage system. It must not be understood, however, by 
this term, that the fluids conveyed by it are of no further use 
to the organism. Every part of the body is supplied with a 
system of vessels (lymphatics) which commence as spaces 
between the cells (the lymph spaces). Into these spaces flow 
the nutritive fluids, which have been poured out by the blood 
system upon the cells. In the walls of the alimentary canal, 
these vessels take up some of the digestive products, especially 
fats ; the fluid they contain then presents a milky appearance, 
and is called chyle, the vessels themselves being described as 
lacteals. The lymph spaces open into minute vessels which 
collect into larger trunks and eventually empty themselves into 
the veins. The main trunk of the lymphatic system runs 
along the ventral surface of the vertebral column, and is called 
the thoracic duct. In the higher Vertebrates, this duct opens 
into one of the veins of the neck, but in the lower there are 
numerous communications between the vascular and lymphatic 
systems. In their course the lymphatics are interrupted by 
glands which act as filters to strain off any hurtful substances. 
These substances either remain stored up in the glands, or 
more generally are destroyed by the activity of the amoeboid 
cells in the glands. 

Urinary organs. — Except in the lowest Vertebrates, the 
urinary organs consist of a pair of kidneys, which are generally 
placed in the posterior part of the abdominal cavity. Each 
kidney may be considered to consist of a collection of nephridia 
or segmental organs (similar to those seen in the earth-worm). 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 



H5 



The kidneys pour their urinary secretion into a pair of ducts or 
ureters, which run down, one from each kidney to open into 
the bladder, into a sinus common to the genital and the urinary 
products, or into the cloaca. 

. Wtr . 




Fig. 86.— Diagrammatic representation of the segmental organs (nephridia) in a 
segmented Worm (after C. Semper). Ds, septum; IVtr, ciliated funnels of 
nephridia. 

The ureter develops on the surface of the embryo as a groove which 
later becomes formed into a canal, so that although the nephridia or 
tubules do not open to the exterior, they open into a canal which in 
development is pinched off from the exterior, its walls being epiblastic in 
origin. 

In connection with each tubule or nephridium, a pouch 
appears, into which a coil of arterial blood vessels (glomerulus) 
becomes pushed, the pouch with its blood vessels being known 

10 



Digitized 



by Google 



146 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



as the Malpighian body. As a rule the ciliated funnel, which 
was present during development, becomes completely closed. 
The walls of the tubule for a considerable part of their extent 
are lined with glandular cells, and are richly supplied with 
blood vessels. The urine is derived partly from the blood as 




Fig. 87.— Diagrammatic representation of the kidney (segmental organs) of a Dog- 
fish embryo (after C. Semper). Wtr, ciliated funnels ; Ug, kidney duct. 

it passes through the glomeruli and partly from that in the 
vessels between the tubules. The glandular cells, which line 
the walls of these tubules, take up from the blood the nitro- 
genous waste material, and excrete it into the duct of the 
tubule ; it is then washed down to the exterior by the fluid 
which has been poured out by the vessels in the glomerulus. 
The Nervous system. — This consists of a brain, of a spinal 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 147 

cord which contains a narrow central canal, and of the cranial 
and spinal nerves. The central canal of the spinal cord is 
continued into the brain where it is dilated to form the ven- 
tricles. The brain is only the dilated anterior end of the spinal 
cord ; it consists primarily of three dilatations, called the three 
primary vesicles, and it is from these that all the parts of the 
complex adult brain are developed. The first primary vesicle 
gives rise anteriorly to the olfactory lobes, and laterally to the 
cerebral hemispheres. The remainder of this vesicle is called 




Fig. 88.— Ciliated funnel and Malpighian body from the anterior part of the kidney 
of Proteus (after Spengel). Nc, kidney tubule ; 7V, ciliated funnel ; Mk, Mai- 
pighian body. 

the thalamencephalon ; on the dorsal surface of this there is 
a small outgrowth called the pineal gland, supposed to be the 
rudimentary remains of a median eye, and on its ventral 
surface there is another outgrowth, the pituitary body. The 
dilatation of the anterior end of the spinal canal in the 
thalamencephalon is called the third ventricle, and this com- 
municates with the two lateral ventricles in the cerebral 
hemispheres. Posteriorly the third ventricle communicates 
with the canal connecting the third with the fourth ventricle. 
The seoond primary vesicle develops less than does either 



Digitized 



by Google 



148 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



the first or third. In the lower Vertebrates it becomes divided 
into two optic lobes, each of which contains a small ventricle, 
while in the higher Vertebrates each optic lobe becomes 
partially divided into two, the four lobes thus produced being 
called the corpora quadrigemina. 

The third primary vesicle gives rise to an outgrowth, which 
in some animals (as the Frog) is small and unimportant, whilst 
in most animals it is large and well developed. It forms the 




Fig. 89.— a, brain and anterior part of spinal cord of human embryo (after 
KSlliker) : Vh> fore brain ; Zh, thalamencephalon ; Mh, mid brain ; Hh t hind 
brain ; Nh, medulla oblongata ; No, optic nerve ; T, anterior ventral ending 
of the thalamencephalon. £, diagrammatic longitudinal section through a 
vertebrate brain (after Huxley): Hs, cerebral hemispheres; LO, olfactory 
lobes ; Olf, olfactory nerve ; ThO, optic thalamus ; Vt, third ventricle ; No, 
optic nerve ; H, pituitary body ; Gp, pineal gland ; CQ, corpora quadrigemina ; 
Cb, cerebellum ; MO, medulla oblongata ; PV, pons varolii. 

cerebellum and pons varolii The remainder of this vesicle 
forms the medulla oblongata which is continuous posteriorly 
with the spinal cord. The medulla oblongata contains within 
it the fourth ventricle. 

The various parts of the brain present great variations in 
size and complexity, according to whether the animal is low or 
high in the scale of development ; thus, in the lower Fishes the 
cerebral hemispheres are small and are only incompletely 
separated from each other, whereas in the higher Vertebrates 
they are so large that they overlap and conceal beneath them 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 



149 




Fig. 90.— Brain and anterior part ol spinal cord of Hexanchus griseus (after 
Gegenbauer). Right eye has been removed. A, anterior cavity of the skull ; 
N, nasal capsule ; Vh, cerebral hemispheres ; M h, optic lobes ; Ce, cerebellum ; 
Mo, medulla oblongata ; Bo, olfactory bulb ; tr, fourth nerve ; Tr 1 , ophthalmic 
branch of fifth nerve ; a, terminal branches of same ; Tr", second and Tr"', 
third branch of fifth ; Fa, seventh nerve ; Gp, ninth ; Vg, tenth ; L, branch of 
tenth to lateral line ; /, intestinal branch ; Os, superior oblique muscle of eye ; 
Ri, internal, Re, external, and Rs, superior rectus muscles; S, spiracle; 
Pq, palato quadrate ; Hm, hyomandibular ; R, branchial rays ; I— VI, branchial 
arches ; Br, branchiae ; P, spinal nerves. 



Digitized 



by Google 



150 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

all the other parts of the brain. The. thalamencephalon, the 
optic lobes, the cerebellum, and the medulla oblongata vary 
less than do the cerebral hemispheres. The higher the 
animal, the more complex does the brain become, reaching 
its most complex condition in Man. 

The cranial and spinal nerves arise as outgrowths from the 
central nervous system. In the nerves arising from the spinal 
cord, two roots — a single dorsal sensory root, and a single or 
multiple ventral motor root — occur. In the brain many of the 
nerves primitively arise by a single dorsal root. The first ten 
cranial nerves are very constant in their distribution. The 
first, the olfactory, supplies the nasal organ ; the second, the 
optic, is the nerve of sight ; the third or oculo motor, the fourth 
or pathetic, and the sixth or abducens, are all motor nerves for 
the muscles moving the eyeball ; the fifth or trigeminus sends 
one large branch forwards through the orbit, a second to the 
upper jaw, and a third to the lower jaw ; the seventh or facial 
chiefly supplies muscles, and in Fishes forks over the hyoidean 
gill-slit ; the eighth or auditory goes to the ear ; the ninth or 
glossopharyngeal supplies the pharynx, and in Fishes forks over 
the first gill-slit ; and the tenth or vagus goes to the gills or 
lungs, to the heart, and to the stomach. 

The spinal nerves arise as outgrowths from the spinal cord ; the dorsal 
or posterior are always single as in the cranial nerves, and arise from a 
continuous ridge or crest along the dorsal surface of the cord ; each root 
has generally a swelling upon it containing nerve cells and called the 
ganglion of the posterior root. The anterior or ventral roots are frequently 
multiple at their origin and never present any ganglionic swellings upon 
them. It has, however, been suggested that the ganglia upon the visceral 
or sympathetic nervous system, which is formed of nerve branches derived 
from the anterior roots, represent the ganglia of these roots. 

The sympathetic nerves are derived from the anterior roots of the spinal 
nerves ; they supply the viscera and the blood vessels. 

Sense organs. — The sense organs develop, like the central 



Digitized 



by Google 




Fig. 9x.— Nervous system of the Frog (after Ecker). O/, olfactory nerves ; O, eye ; 
Op, optic nerve ; Vg, Gasserian ganglion ; Xg. ganglion of vagus ; Spn x, nrst 
spinal nerve ; Br, branchial nerve ; Sg x— xo, the ten ganglia of the sympathetic 
system ; /s, ischial nerve. 



Digitized 



by Google 



152 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

nervous system, from the external layer of the embryo, that is 
from the epiblast. The ingrowths from the epiblast come into 
relationship with the sensory nerves or outgrowths from the 
brain, and thus sensations received by the sense organs from 
the external world are transmitted to the brain. The nasal 
sense organs develop as pits, and in connection with the 
sensory epithelium of these pits, the endings of the olfactory 
nerves are found. The ear develops in a similar manner, but 
in the higher Vertebrates the pit sinks deeply into the auditory 
capsule, and its narrowed neck closes. It also becomes 
subdivided into a complicated series of chambers and canals 
into connection with which come the branches of the auditory 
nerve. In most Fishes there is no direct path for impressions 
of sound to travel to the auditory organs, but in all the higher 
Vertebrates the spiracular or hyomandibular gill-cleft becomes 
replaced by an outgrowth which forms a cavity. This, the 
tympanic cavity, is shut off from the exterior by the tympanum 
or drum of the ear. The internal part of the cleft is re- 
presented by an outgrowth from the pharynx to the internal 
ear (the Eustachian tube). 

The organ of vision, the eye, is present in almost all Verte- 
brates ; in a few of the lower forms it is absent or degenerate, 
and in some that always live in darkness, it is hidden under 
the skin. In all the higher forms it is well developed, and 
consists of an ingrowth from the epidermis which forms the 
lens, and an outgrowth from the brain, the retina, which is 
connected with the brain by the optic nerve. In addition 
there are numerous blood vessels and various layers of pig- 
mented epithelium, muscle, etc., all of which are derived from 
the middle layer or mesoblast. 

Eeproductive organs. — With the exception of a few Fishes 
the sexes are separate, the male being provided with a pair of 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 



153 



testes, and the female with either one or, in most cases, a pair 
of ovaries. In some low Fishes, the male and female genital 
products (spermatozoa and ova), after being thrown off from 
the testes and ovaries into the abdominal cavity, pass to the 
exterior through a genital pore placed behind the anus ; but in 
most Vertebrates they pass to the exterior by special ducts. In 




Fig 92.— Female generative organs, a, Ornithorhynchus (after Owen) ; 6, of a 
Civet; c } of an Ape (from Claus). Ov, ovary; T t oviduct; U, uterus; V t vagina; 
H , urinary bladder ; Ur, ureter ; M % mouth of uterus ; F, opening of ureter ; 
5, urogenital sinus ; Kl> cloaca ; D, intestine. 

Amphibia (Frogs, etc.) the spermatozoa pass down the ureters ; 
but in most other adult Vertebrates the genital and urinary 
ducts are separate as far as the bladder, the urino-genital sinus, 
or the cloaca. In some Fishes the ovary is single, and in Birds 
the right ovary and oviduct are either much reduced in size or 
are entirely absent. In most Mammals the testes move from 



Digitized 



by Google 



* 54 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



their original abdominal position into a pouch of skin (the 
scrotum). 
The female genital duct (the oviduct or Mullerian duct) has been generally 




Fig. 93.— Urinary and sexual organs of a Mouse (Crtcetus vulgaris) (after Gegen- 
bauer). R, kidney; U, ureter; H, urinary bladder; T, testis; F, spermatic 
cord ; N, epididymis ; Vd t vas deferens ; Vs, vesicula seminalis ; Pr, prostate ; 
Sg, urethra; Gc, Cowper's glands; Gt, Tyson's glands ; Cp % corpora cavernosa ; 
E t glans penis ; Pp, prepuce. 

considered to be the persistent duct of a temporary head-kidney (pronephros); 
but the view has recently been brought forward that this duct disappears 
in the female as well as in the male, and that the oviduct is developed from 
a fold of the peritoneum. 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERTEBRATA. 155 



The male genital duct is the persistent duct of the middle kidney 
(mesonephros, Wolffian body), which in the Amphibia forms the ureter, but 
in other Vertebrates functions only as the male efferent duct, the Wolffian 
body itself functioning as epididymis. 

The eggs formed in the ovary are set free into the body- 
cavity by the rupture of the membrane covering the ovary ; 
they then pass directly into the openings of the oviducts. The 
lower portions of the two oviducts frequently join together to 
form a single dilated tube, which, in the higher Vertebrates, is 
known as the uterus. The eggs in almost all mammalia lodge 
in the uterus, and there undergo development, the young being 
born alive. 

In many Fishes and Amphibia, the unfertilised eggs from the 
female and the spermatozoa from the male are both cast into 
the water, fertilisation of the eggs thus taking' place outside the 
animal. 

In most other Vertebrates, there are more or less com- 
plicated copulatory organs, the male being provided with a 
penis, along which the duct from the bladder (the urethra) 
passes. The spermatozoa are discharged into this duct, and 
during copulation are directly introduced into a pouch, the 
vagina, with which the uterus communicates. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XIII. 
AMCEBA. 

THE Amoeba is a Protozoon, that is to say, it is an animal 
consisting of a single cell. Like all the Protozoa, it is 
very small. 

The term Protozoon, when first introduced about forty-three years ago, 
was somewhat vaguely used. Various organisms, now excluded, such as 
some multicellular animals and many unicellular plants, were all included 
under the generic name of Protozoa. Now, however, the term is restricted 
to unicellular animals, all those consisting of more than a single cell being 
classed as Metazoa. 

It is true that some Protozoa form colonies, that is to say, a number of 
them cohere together, and thus appear to form a multicellular animal ; but 
in all such cases the colony can be broken up, and each detached cell will 
then lead an independent, unimpaired existence, fulfilling all its own 
functions, and living on exactly as though it were still attached to its 
fellows. This shows that the colony really consisted of a number of inde- 
pendent unicellular animals simply cohering together. 

The Amoeba is one of the simplest of the Protozoa. It con- 
sists of a mass of naked protoplasm, which is capable of taking 
solid particles of food into its substance and digesting them. 

Amoebae usually live on the surface of the mud at the bottom 
of fresh-water pools. The largest are of sufficient size to be 
just visible to the naked eye, whilst the smallest are less 
than -y^j inch in diameter. 

One of the most characteristic points about the Amoeba is 

156 



Digitized 



by Google 



AMOEBA. 



157 



its ever-changing shape ; and it was owing to this, that when 
first discovered, the name proteus animalcule was given to it. 

Anatomy. — The protoplasm of the Amoeba is viscid, and 
not very much denser than the water in which it is living. On 
careful examination it can be readily seen that the protoplasm 




Fig. 94.— Amoeba (from Marshall and Hurst). Figs. 2 and 3 were drawn from the 
same specimen ; figs. 5, 6, 7, and 8 were drawn from one specimen at intervals 
of about twenty seconds. N, nucleus ; P, pseudopodium ; PV, pulsating 
vacuole. 

can be divided into two parts — an inner more granular portion, 
and an outer clearer portion. The former is described as the 
endoplasm or endosarc, the latter as the ectoplasm or ectosarc. 
As before mentioned, the Amoeba is constantly changing its 
shape, and this change of shape maybe seen to be accompanied 
by the protrusion and retraction of blunt processes, called 
pseudopodia. It is only the clear part of the protoplasm 



Digitized 



by Google 



158 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

whioh flows into these protrusions, no granules being visible in 
them. The pseudopodia may be protruded from any part of 
the surface, and by means of them a slow, crawling movement 
is produced. The animal throws out a pseudopodium, fixes 
the blunt end to the surface on which it is crawling, and then 
draws its body up to it. 

The endosarc contains several clear spaces or vaouoles, 
which are filled with a clear fluid, less dense than the sur- 
rounding protoplasm. These vacuoles frequently contain 
small masses of food, and are then called food vaouoles. 

Pulsating, or Contractile vacuole. — At one part of the 
animal a vacuole may be seen which is fairly constant in its 
position, and which starts as a minute speck. It gradually 
grows larger and larger until it appears as a clear space of con- 
siderable size. It then suddenly disappears. Its gradual 
increase in size is due to its taking up water into itself from the 
surrounding protoplasm. This water has been absorbed through 
the ectoplasm, either with food or without. Its sudden dis- 
appearance is due to the bursting of this water through the 
ectosarc, and the consequent flowing in of the surrounding 
protoplasm to take its place. 

The larger granules in the endosarc may consist of one of 
three substances— of food, of substances from which all the 
nourishment has been extracted, or of substances produced by 
the degeneration of the protoplasm. 

The Nucleus is not very easy to see unless it be stained. It 
is a spherical or ovoid body consisting of protoplasm, which is 
denser than the endosarc. As a rule there is only a single 
nucleus, but sometimes two or even three have been observed. 

Physiology. — The Amoeba feeds upon minute plants or 
animals which it takes into its body in a peculiarly character- 
istic manner. As it has no mouth, food particles can only get 



Digitized 



by Google 



AMCEBA. 159 



in by being forced through the ectosarc. The animal throws 
out one or two pseudopodia which encircle the food, together 
with a drop of water. The surface of the ectosarc in contact 
with the food then gives way, so that the food, still encircled 
by its drop of water, is precipitated into the protoplasm. A 
food vacuole is thus formed ; the water soon disperses, leaving 
the particle of food in direct contact with the protoplasm. The 
water from the food vacuoles, together with that absorbed by 
the protoplasm through the ectosarc, collects into one spot to 
form the pulsating vacuole which, as before mentioned, appears, 
enlarges, and disappears with some regularity. The pulsations 
of the contractile vacuole indicate a more or less regular 
washing out of the protoplasm, thus ridding it of soluble waste 
matters such as are excreted in the higher animals by the 
kidneys. The contractile vacuole of the Amoeba, therefore, 
may be said to be an excretory organ. 

The food particles, having come into direct contact with the 
protoplasm, undergo digestion. All the substances that they 
contain, which are capable of building up protoplasm, are 
extracted and assimilated, and the remainder are thrown out 
from the animal through the ectosarc in a manner similar to 
that by which the food was taken in. Exactly how digestion 
goes on is not very clear, but, as the food is directly taken into 
the animal, the process is described as one of intracellular 
digestion. 

Although the Amoeba possesses no trace of a nervous system, 
yet it has some power of discrimination as to its food. This 
is shown by the fact that an Amoeba will not take into its 
substance everything with which it may come into contact. 
Those substances which would be hurtful to it, it rejects. In 
addition to solid food particles and water, the protoplasm of 
the Amoeba, like all other protoplasm, requires oxygen for the 



Digitized 



by Google 



160 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

continuation of its activity; this it obtains from the water 
in which it lives, and which contains oxygen in solution. 

The solid food particles consist usually of minute animals or 
plants. We thus see that the Amoeba feeds upon protoplasm, 
and thus it obtains its carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen in a 
highly elaborated form. In that, it differs widely from the 
unicellular chlorophyll-containing plants. These plants, how- 
ever, resemble the Amoeba in obtaining their oxygen from the 
water in which they live. 

If the surface on which the Amoeba is lying be roughly 
shaken, or if any body in the water comes into contact with 
the animal, all the pseudopodia are withdrawn, and the Amoeba 
takes on a spherical shape, and remains quiescent for some 
time until the disturbing influence is withdrawn. 

Eeproduction. — The Amoeba reproduces itself by fission. 
When the animal has grown so large as to become unwieldy, it 
divides into two parts. It is probable that the nucleus is the 
first to divide. Thus two Amoebae are produced each exactly 
resembling the original one, each consisting of ectosarc, 
endosarc, nucleus, etc. 

This simple mode of reproduction is the only one that has been definitely 
proved to occur constantly in Amoebae. Occasionally, however, two Amoebae 
fuse together, surround themselves with a dense membrane, and then break 
up into numerous little pieces, each of which eventually grows up into an 
adult animal. This mode of reproduction is an instance of conjugation. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XIV. 

YEAST PLANT (TORULA, OR SACCHAROMYCES 
CEREVISUE). 

THE Yeast Plant is a minute unicellular Fungus. It 
grows either on the surface of saccharine fluids or 
immersed in them. 

Anatomy. — A typical Yeast plant consists of a cell provided 
with a delicate cellulose cell-wall. It is round or oval in 
shape, and from -^^ to ^^ inch in diameter. 




Fig. 95.— Growing cells of yeast (JSaccharomyces cerevisice) (after Prantl). 

The cell- wall encloses the protoplasm, imbedded in which 
there is a body presenting the characters of a nucleus. This 
may be demonstrated by careful staining. 

One or more small vacuoles containing cell-sap usually 
occur in the protoplasm. The protoplasm contains no starch, 
but a small quantity of fat is usually present. The Yeast plants 
either occur singly or collected together in heaps or chains. 

Reproduction. — The Yeast plant multiplies in two ways : — 

1. By gemmation or budding. 

2. By endogenous spore formation. 



161 



IT 



Digitized 



by Google 



162 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

Budding. — One or more minute buds are thrown out, which 
increase in size, become separated from the parent by the 
formation of the cell-wall, and eventually become detached. 
A considerable number of plants may cohere together for a 
•considerable time forming the above-mentioned masses or 
•chains. 

Endogenous Spore Formation. — If Yeast be cultivated upon 
a porous plate, or on the cut surface of a potato, some cells 
instead of throwing out buds will be seen to form spores. The 
protoplasm usually becomes divided into four spores, each of 
which surrounds itself with a cell-wall. Eventually these spores 
are set free by the rupture and disintegration of the cell-wall of 
the parent. The latter mode of reproduction only occurs if 
the conditions of growth are rather unfavourable, the usual 
method of reproduction being by gemmation. 

Under favourable conditions yeast will multiply with such 
extreme rapidity, that if a few plants be added to a clear fluid 
which contains suitable nourishment, and if this clear fluid be 
kept for a few hours in a warm place, such an enormous 
number of yeast plants will develop in it, that the previously 
clear fluid will become turbid. 

Physiology. — As Yeast contains no chlorophyll, it cannot 
obtain its carbon from the carbon dioxide of the atmosphere ; 
hence all its processes go on as well in darkness as in light ; 
its carbon is obtained from organic substances, and its nitrogen 
in a manner similar to that of other plants, namely from 
comparatively simple nitrogenous salts present in solution in 
the water around it. If free oxygen be present, the yeast 
absorbs it in a manner common to both plants and animals, 
and gives off carbon dioxide. If no free oxygen be present 
the Yeast plant seems to be able to obtain sufficient to maintain 
life from complex oxygen-containing bodies, but in the absence 



Digitized 



by Google 



YEAST PLANT. 163 



of free oxygen both growth and multiplication are far less 
rapid. 

One of the most characteristic properties of the Yeast plant 
is its power of setting up alcoholic fermentation in fluids con- 
taining sugar. The fermentation processes go on much more 
rapidly when free oxygen is absent than when it is present. The 
sugar (C 6 H 12 6 ) becomes split up, with the result that alcohol 
(C 2 H 5 OH) and carbon dioxide (C0 2 ) are produced. 

C 6 H 12 6 = 2C 2 H 5 OH + 2CO3. 

, • \ 

Most of the sugar is thus split up, but a small amount is 
probably assimilated by the plant itself, and about 5 per 
cent, breaks up into glycerine and succinic acid. 

Various other Fungi, and certain parts of the higher plants, such as ripe 
fruits, may be induced to set up an alcoholic fermentation in sugar in the 
absence of free oxygen. 

For Yeast to grow and multiply, to maintain the activity 
of its protoplasm, to form new protoplasm, cellulose, cell- 
wall, fat, etc., it must be supplied with all the necessary 
builders up of protoplasm ; that is to say, with Carbon, Oxygen, 
Hydrogen, Nitrogen, Sulphur, Phosphorus, Potassium, Mag- 
nesium, and Calcium. As it contains no chlorophyll it must 
like other Fungi have its carbon supplied to it in an organic 
form. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHAPTER XV. 

PROTOCOCCUS AND GLEOCAPSA. 

THE Protococcus viridis forms a good example of the 
unicellular Algae, and in common with other Algae 
contains chlorophyll. It lives in moist situations, such as in 
gutters, on the trunks of trees, or on damp roofs. 

An adult specimen of Protococcus is a spherical body, 
varying in size, but always very minute. It is provided with 
a cellulose cell-wall enclosing a mass of protoplasm, in 
which is imbedded a nucleus, containing a nucleolus. In the 
protoplasm, in addition to the nucleus, there can readily be 
seen to be a number of small bodies, coloured bright green by 
the chlorophyll they contain ; these are called chromatophores, 
and correspond to the chlorophyll corpuscles of the higher 
plants. The chromatophores are so arranged that they form 
a lining on the inner surface of the cell-wall. The minute 
plants are either isolated or collected together in groups. 
Reproduction is very simple. A single plant becomes divided 
into two by means of a partition wall ; the nucleus at the 
same time divides, so that two new plants are produced, each 
one consisting of cell-wall, protoplasm, chromatophores, and 
nucleus. 

Another form of Protococcus, namely, the Protococcus or 
Haematococcus pluvialis, is not quite so common, but it is 

very frequently found in water-butts, shallow pools, etc. ; it 

i6 4 



Digitized 



by Google 



PROTOCOCCUS AND GLEOCAPSA. 



165 



varies in size from -^ to T ^ 1J inch in diameter. At one 
stage, it is very like the Protococcus viridis, but it differs 
from it, in that its cell-wall is thicker, and that the chlorophyll 
within the chromatophores is frequently coloured red instead 
of green. Small proteid bodies (pyrenoids), surrounded by a 
layer of starch, frequently occur in the chromatophores. Before 
arriving at the resting stage, the Protococcus pluvialis passes 
through a motile stage, in which its cellulose cell-wall is thin, 
and is separated from the protoplasm by a space containing 




Fig. 96.— Protococcus viridis (from Strasburger). A, single plant showing chro- 
matophores and nucleus ; B, C, D, E, and F, several plants united together ; 
in D the cells on the left have just divided. 

cell-sap. The plant is provided with two long vibratile 
flagella, which are prolongations of the protoplasm at the 
pointed end of its pear-shaped body, and which traverse the 
space between the protoplasm and the cell-wall, perforating the 
latter. By means of the rapid movements of these flagella, the 
plant can move actively about, travelling at about the rate of a 
foot in a quarter of an hour. Before reproduction occurs, the 
resting phase is always assumed, the cell-wail becomes thickened, 
and, lying closely in contact with the protoplasm, forms a cyst 
around it. 



Digitized 



by Google 



166 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

The reproduction of Protococcus pluvialis differs consider- 
ably from that described as occurring in Protococcus viridis, 
it multiplies by endogenous spore formation; two kinds of 
spores are produced, which differ from each other in size, the 
larger being called macrospores and the smaller microspores. 
As both kinds are motile, they are both described as zoospores. 
In a plant which is going to form macrospores, the proto- 
plasm divides itself first into two and then into four portions, 
each of which assumes a pear-like shape. The macrospores 
thus formed are then set free by the absorption of the cell-wall 
of the parent. Each consists of a naked mass of protoplasm, 
provided at its small end with two vibratile flagella. After a 
short time the protoplasm develops around itself a cellulose 
cell-wall, and thus the plant assumes the form of an adult 
Protococcus pluvialis in the motile stage. After a time the 
plant comes to rest, develops a thicker cell-wall, loses 
its flagella, and thus forms an adult resting Protococcus 
pluvialis. 

In a plant which is going to form microspores the proto- 
plasm becomes divided into eight portions, the cell-wall of 
the parent is absorbed, the microspores are set free and 
develop flagella just like the macrospores, but during the 
whole of their free swimming stage they remain naked, only 
developing a cell-wall when they come to rest. 

Physiology. — The protoplasm in the Protococcus is more 
highly differentiated than that in yeast, hence it may be 
said to have reached a higher stage of development. Differ- 
entiation and consequent division of labour have taken place, 
part of the protoplasm forming the chromatophores, part giving 
rise to the cell-wall, and part being formed into flagella, which 
enable the plant during one stage of its existence to move 
actively about. 



Digitized 



by Google 



PROTOCOCCUS AND GLEOCAPSA. 167 

In its mode of nutrition the Protococcus resembles other 
green plants. It lives entirely on oxygen, on carbon dioxide, 
and on simple salts which are held in solution in the water in 
which it is growing. The carbon dioxide is decomposed, the 
carbon being made to unite with water, with the result that 
starch C„H 10 O 5 is formed and oxygen set free — 
6CO, + 5H 2 = C 6 H 10 O 6 + 60 2 

The starch can be frequently seen in the protoplasm sur- 
rounding the pyrenoids. This process can only go on in 
the presence of sunlight. That oxygen is set free can be 
demonstrated by exposing tne planes in water to sunlight, 
collecting some of the bubbles of gas that are given off 
from them, and testing the gas so obtained ; it will be found 
to be oxygen. In common with all other protoplasm, whether 
animal or vegetable, that of Protococcus needs oxygen to 
enable it to perform its functions. Oxygen is being con- 
stantly taken up by the plant, and a corresponding quantity of 
carbon dioxide is being constantly given off, that is to say, a 
process of respiration is continually going on. During the day 
the amount of oxygen given off is far in excess of that required 
for the processes of respiration, and correspondingly, much 
more carbon dioxide is decomposed by the protoplasm than is 
formed by it. Respiration goes on however in the dark, whilst 
no carbon dioxide is decomposed, and no oxygen is given off. 

The salts necessary for the growth of the plant must contain 
sulphur, phosphorus, potassium, magnesium, and calcium, as 
with yeast, but in addition the Protococcus, in common with 
all chlorophyll-containing plants, requires iron for the purpose 
of forming the green or red colouring matter of the chlorophyll. 
The zoospores are sensitive to light, swimming toward the light 
if it be not too strong, and away from it if it be very 
intense. 



Digitized 



by Google 



168 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 



Gleocapsa. — Growing on flower-pots and on the glass of 
greenhouses there is frequently found another unicellular Alga, 
namely, Gleocapsa. 

Anatomy. — The Gleocapsa is a unicellular Alga belonging to 
the family of the Chroococcaceae. It possesses a striated, 
gelatinous cell-wall ; it contains chlorophyll which is diffused 
through the protoplasm, and so far no nucleus has been dis- 
covered in it. 

Reproduction. — The globular cell-body of the Gleocapsa 
lengthens until it becomes oval, the protoplasm then becomes 




Fig. 97.— Gleocapsa (from Strasburger). A, at the commencement of division ; 
B, shortly after division ; C, four cells enclosed within a single outer cell-wall. 

constricted in the middle, and soon divides into two. A 
delicate cell-wall then grows around each of the two masses of 
protoplasm. The portion of the cell-wall in contact with the 
protoplasm thickens and becomes rounded off, so that two 
plants are enclosed within the original cell-wall. These 
daughter cells again divide with the result that four or eight 
plants may all be enclosed by a common wall, which is the 
remains of the original cell-wall. A considerable number of 
generations are therefore combined together to form a cell 
colony. After a time the external wall ruptures and the 
separate plants are set free ; almost immediately division again 
occurs in each of these isolated plants, so that it is rare to find 



Digitized 



by Google 



PROTOCOCCUS AND GLEOCAPSA. 169 

a single Gleocapsa, two or more being almost always found 
united together. 

Physiology. — In its mode of nutrition, the Gleocapsa re- 
sembles the Protococcus, obtaining its carbon from carbon 
dioxide in the presence of sunlight, its oxygen for respiration 
from the atmosphere, and its other constituents from simple 
salts in solution in the moisture in which it lives. 

At no stage of its existence does the Gleocapsa ever form 
motile zoospores. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XVI. 



BACTERIA. 



BACTERIA are unicellular Thallophytes. They are 
generally considered to belong to the fission Fungi, 
or Schizomycetes, but as three forms are known to contain 
chlorophyll, it is perhaps better to consider them as a class 
by themselves. 




Fig. 98.— Bacteria of the fur of teeth (from Strasburger). a, Leptothrix buccalis 
in a * after treatment with iodine ; 6, Micrococcus ; c t Spirillum dentium, after 
treatment with iodine ; </, " Comma bacillus " of the mucous membrane of the 
mouth. 

Bacteria are exceedingly minute, unicellular, spherical or 
thread-like plants, which multiply by fission. The large 
majority of them contain no chlorophyll, and hence must 
obtain their carbon from more or less complex organic carbon- 



Digitized 



by Google 



BACTERIA. 171 



containing substances. The few chlorophyll-containing forms 
obtain it from carbon dioxide. All the other constituents of 
their food are obtained in the form of solutions of simple salts. 
They have a remarkable power of breaking down complex 
chemical substances into simple ones; they, like the Yeast 
plant, sometimes accomplish this by setting up fermentation 
processes in them. These organic substances are split up so 
that the resulting simple ones may serve the Bacteria for food. 

This power that Bacteria possess, of breaking up complex organic sub- 
stances, is of the utmost importance in the economy of nature. Were it not 
for them, the surface of the earth would soon be covered with the bodies 
of its dead inhabitants. When an animal or plant dies, all the complex 
organic substances, of which it is composed, must be broken up into simple 
salts before they can be made use of by ordinary plants This breaking up 
is chiefly performed by animals, but it is also largely brought about by the 
agency of Bacteria. We thus see, that Bacteria aie most powerful auxiliaries 
to animals. 

The fermentation action is set up by substances produced by the activity 
of the protoplasm of the Bacteria. The substances formed vary in different 
species, and the effects produced are correspondingly different. 

Amongst the results produced by Bacteria by processes of fermentation, 
the following may be mentioned : starch is converted into sugar, cellulose is 
dissolved, albumen is peptonised, being converted from an insoluble to a 
soluble form, urea is converted into carbonate of ammonium, lactic acid is 
formed in milk, etc. 

Putrefaction, or as it has been called putrefactive fermentation, is a 
complicated process, varying considerably according to the amount of 
oxygen present. It is usually a double process, the first stage of which is 
brought about by the Bacteria which need abundant oxygen (aerobic 
species), and the second by those which flourish when oxygen is absent 
(anaerobic species). If oxygen be present in abundance, the putrefactive 
process is not as a rule characterised by the evolution of foul-smelling 
gases ; if oxygen be absent or limited in amount, true putrefaction occurs, 
and various foul-smelling gases, together with various substances (ptomaines) 
which are mostly of a highly poisonous nature, are produced. The final 
result of the processes set up is, that the complex organic substances are 
decomposed into simple substances. 

Many Bacteria produce vivid colours during their growth. 



Digitized 



by Google 



172 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

The Bacteria which lead a parasitic existence very fre- 
quently set up diseases in their hosts ; thus tuberculosis, 
erysipelas, anthrax, and a large number of other diseases in 
man are due to the presence of these micro-organisms. A 
Bacterium consists of protoplasm enclosed by a cell-wall, in 
which colouring matters are occasionally imbedded. In most 
forms the protoplasm is colourless, and fat globules are 
frequently present in it. Bodies resembling nuclei have 
been lately seen in some forms, but their exact nature has not 
been finally determined. 

Outside the cell-wall a gelatinous sheath occurs, which is 
developed to a very variable degree in different forms. 

Some Bacteria are always at rest, the trembling movements 
frequently seen in them, being only such as are exhibited by 
non-living particles. They are described as Brownian move- 
ments, and are due to mechanical causes. Others are some- 
times at rest and sometimes in active movement. In some 
cases the movements are rotatory; in others again they are 
more definite, and are set up by flagella, which project from 
one or both ends of the cell (some species of Spirilla and 
Bacilli). The movements are sometimes slow, oscillating and 
rolling, in others they are rapid and darting. 

In the quiescent state the Bacteria are either isolated, or 
collected together in long threads or chains; occasionally, 
too, the swollen gelatinous capsules are fused together to 
make a gelatinous mass (zoogloea condition), in which the 
separate Bacteria are imbedded. This gelatinous mass forms 
the scum so frequently seen on the surface of putrescent fluids. 

Multiplication takes place either by spore formation or by 
fission (hence their name of Fission Fungi) ; the daughter cells 
in the latter case either remain attached to their parents or are 
set free. Spore formation occurs usually, but not exclusively, 



Digitized 



by Google 



BACTERIA. 



173 



when nourishment is scarce. In most cases the spores are 
formed endogenously ; this occurs in many rod forms (Bacilli), 
and possibly in some other forms (Spirilla). When the rod 
has grown to a considerable length, bright highly refracting 
spores are seen within it ; its contents now become granular and 
turbid, and it is at last dissolved, the spores being thus set free. 
Another method of spore formation has been described, with 
the formation of so-called arthrospores. This occurs in the 
following way : — if nourishment is scarce, one member of the 
chain becomes modified to form a rather larger, thicker walled 




Fig. 99.— Bacteria (after Cohn). a, Micrococcus both isolated and in the zoogloea 
form ; b, Bacterium termo, in free and zoogloea form. 

cell than the rest ; the remaining cells die and drop off, leaving 
the athrospore to build up a new colony. 

Bacteria have been classed according to their shape into : — 

1. Micrococci, round forms. 

2. Bacilli, rod forms with a length two or three times as 
great as their breadth. 

3. Spirilla, mostly motile, spirally twisted threads. 

4. Forms with varying shape. 

Such a broad classification is useful, but insufficient, owing to 
the very various results produced by the activities of different 
species with similar shapes. The separation of different species 



Digitized 



by Google 



174 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 

from one another is chiefly based upon (i) the differences 
in their mode of growth, (2) the different characters the 
colonies present when cultivated in different media, (3) the 
effects produced by their growth, (4) their relative size, and 
(5) the different ways in which they are affected by staining 
reagents. 

In studying Bacteria, the following methods are usually adopted. A 
very small quantity of the material containing the Bacteria, is shaken up 
with some gelatine that has been made just sufficiently warm to be liquefied ; 
this is then spread out upon a plate, and after a time the gelatine will be 
seen to be dotted over with numerous small colonies of Bacteria. If these 
are examined microscopically, it can then readily be seen whether the colony 
examined consists of Bacilli, Micrococci, or Spirilla. The next step is to 
inoculate some nutrient material, such as gelatine, with a little of the pure 
culture obtained from the selected colony, and to note the rapidity with 
which the Bacteria grow, their mode of growth, their colour, whether the 
gelatine is liquefied or not, whether they grow down into it or remain on 
the surface, etc. Next the reactions of the Bacteria with regard to staining 
reagents are noted, and the final step with pathogenic Bacteria is to inject 
some of the pure culture into an animal, and to note the effects produced. 

If some material which is supposed to contain the Bacillus anthracis, 
which gives rise to malignant pustule or anthrax, be taken as an example, 
it will be found that the following characteristic conditions occur : — 

1. A small quantity of blood supposed to contain the Bacilli is shaken up 
with gelatine, and then spread out on a plate, which is then kept at a 
temperature of about 36 C. If the Bacilli are present, after twenty-four to 
forty-eight hours the colonies will appear as minute points. 

2. These points are examined microscopically, and their behaviour 
with staining reagents is noticed. 

3. Some of a colony which has been shown by the microscopic examina- 
tion to be a pure culture of some Bacillus, is then transferred to nutrient 
jelly. After an interval of forty-eight hours, if the colony consists of the 
Bacillus anthracis, under a low power of the microscope it can be seen to 
be a small greenish-black spot with a wavy margin. If instead of the colony 
being placed on the surface of the nutrient jelly, it be plunged on the point 
of a needle into the jelly, the growth will be seen to consist of a delicate 
whitish line along the track left by the needle, from which fine threads run 
off at right angles. 

4. At the end of two or three days it will seen that the jelly has corn- 



Digitized 



by Google 



BACTERIA. 175 



menced to liquefy in the neighbourhood of the growth, and after eight 
days it will be noticed that liquefaction has proceeded to a considerable 
extent. 

5. It will further be noticed that the colony grows better the nearer it is 
to the surface of the jelly. 

6. If now some of the pure culture be injected into the body of some 
animal liable to the disease, such as a rabbit or a mouse, anthrax will be 
invariably produced. 

Owing to the minute size of Bacteria and their spores, these are constantly 
found floating about in the atmosphere. It is therefore absolutely necessary 
in all experiments with Bacteria to sterilise all the vessels, nutrient fluids, 
and other apparatus, before using them. This is usually done by exposing 
them to the prolonged action of heat, so as to kill any Bacteria or spores 
that may be adhering to them. After the apparatus and nutrient fluids have 
been sterilised, they must be carefully protected from accidental contamina- 
tion. 

The reason for making the first plate culture on gelatine, is to isolate the 
Bacterium that is being sought for from others that may be present, so as 
to obtain a culture which consists of only the one form that is to be studied. 

As it is impossible to exclude air from the test-tubes containing the 
nutrient fluids, it is filtered through sterilised cotton wool. 

Bacteria growing best in contact with the air, that is those that grow 
best on the surface of a nutrient substance, are called aerobic, whereas 
those that grow best in the absence of oxygen are said to be anaerobic. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XVII. 

VORTICELLA, 

THE Vorticella, or as it is also called the Bell animalcule, 
belongs to the same class as does the Amoeba, that is to 
say, it is a unicellular animal. In the Amoeba we have seen 
an animal consisting of protoplasm, in which the distinction 
between ectoplasm and endoplasm, though sufficiently clear to 
be seen, yet is not very well marked. In Vorticella we have an 
animal in which the separation of the protoplasm into these two 
layers is very definite ; the ectoplasm forms a more or less tough 
external covering to the semi-fluid endoplasm. Going with this 
greater differentiation of the protoplasm we have of necessity 
various modifications of structure. As in the Amoeba, the single 
cell has to perform all the functions necessary for the main- 
tenance of life and for the reproduction of the species, but as 
the ectoplasm or ectosarc is tougher and more rigid, the animal 
can only change its shape to a limited degree, and is unable to 
throw out pseudopodia, for purposes of movement or of catching 
food, from any part of its surface. This inability to change its 
shape to any great extent, or to throw out pseudopodia, 
necessitates the development from one part of its surface of a 
large number of delicate short threads of protoplasm ; these 
move constantly in the same direction, and therefore serve to 
set up currents in the water in which the animal lives. These 
currents are constantly flowing in such a direction that any 

i 7 6 



Digitized 



by Google 



VORTICELLA. 177 

small animals or plants which come under their influence, are 
swept into a sort of pit at one point of the surface of the animal. 
At the bottom of this pit the ectoplasm is less dense than at 
any other part of the surface, and consequently food particles 
can readily be forced, with a drop of water, into the endo- 
plasm, there forming food vacuoles, as in the Amoeba. The 
short delicate threads of protoplasm are called cilia ; each one is 
supposed to consist of two parts, the one side being elastic, and 
the other side contractile ; when the latter contracts, the thread 
is bent over to that side, then when the contraction passes off, 
the elasticity of the other side causes the cilium to become 
straight again. The result of the alternate contraction and relax- 
ation of the contractile protoplasm is, that the cilium alternately 
rapidly bends and slowly straightens itself, and as the cilia all 
bend together and all in the same direction, the currents set up 
in the water are constant in their direction. Cilia react to the 
same stimuli as any other protoplasm. Moderate increase of 
temperature, weak chemical or electrical stimulation, etc., cause 
increase in their rate of movement ; whilst cold, withdrawal of 
oxygen, etc., retard it. So also a powerful electric shock, a 
strong chemical stimulus, or a temperature above 65 ° C. stops 
their movements altogether by killing them. 

Vorticellae occur both in fresh and salt water. There are 
different species of them, which vary considerably in size, the 
largest being just visible to the naked eye. 

Anatomy. — The Vorticella is bell-shaped, hence its name 
of the Bell animalcule. The mouth of the bell, however, is not 
open, but is closed by a plate-like lid which fits inside its rim, 
only being apparently raised slightly at one side. This ap- 
pearance is due to the bell being solid and its broad end 
being produced into a flange, which looks like the rim of the 
mouth of a bell, whilst the contents bulge into the space inside 



Digitized 



by Google 



178 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



the rim. This rim is called the peristome, and the part which 

^B XI 
XI! * ~ 

Jf 




Fig. ioo.— Vorticellae (from Marshall and Hurst). I, II, III, IV, expanded; V, 
contracted ; VI, separated from its stalk ; VII, VIII, and IX show three stages 
of fission ; X, XI, and XII show the separated individual swimming by means 
of the aboral circlet of cilia. A, food vacuole, discharging contents at anus ; 
C, cilia ; CF, contractile fibre of stalk; D, disc ; H, disc retracted ; FV % food 
vacuole; PH f pharynx; PV t pulsating vacuole; P, peristome; M t myophan 
striation ; N t nucleus ; V, vestibule. 

projects from the mouth and looks like a cover is described as 
the disc. 



Digitized 



by Google 



VORTICELLA. 179 

Between the disc and the peristome there is a fairly deep 

groove, and at one part this groove is hollowed out to form a 

pit, the entrance into which is described as the vestibule. 

The pit itself is called the pharynx or mouth, for in it occurs 

the weak spot in the ectosarc through which food particles 

find their way into the animal. 

The part of this groove, which is on the opposite side to the pharynx, is 
not very distinctly marked. 

There is a fringe of cilia running around the margin of the 
disc, and in the groove separating it from the peristome. 
They are also continued into the pharynx. The movements of 
the cilia are in such a direction that a stream of water is being 
constantly driven along the groove, and in and out of the 
pharynx, so that any solid particles in the water may drop 
down to the bottom of the pharynx, and thus be taken into 
the animal. 

In the upper part of the pharynx there is another weak spot 
in the ectosarc, through which solid waste material, such as 
the remains of food, is discharged. This weak spot is described 
as the Anus, so that in this animal we have both a mouth and 
an anus. 

The denser external layer of the protoplasm, that is, the 
ectosarc or ectoplasm, which covers the whole surface of the 
animal and lines the pharynx, is continued from the small end 
of the bell to form a slender stalk, by means of which the 
animal attaches itself to the stems of water plants, etc. 

The external layer of this ectosarc is called the cuticle. It 
is very elastic and forms a protective covering for the animal, 
and is continued down on the stalk, forming the greater part of 
its thickness. 

The deeper part of the ectosarc is contractile. At the 
lower part of the bell it presents the appearance of a number 



Digitized 



by Google 



180 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

of longitudinal lines or striae, described as the myophan 
striation. These lines are continued down the centre of the 
stalk as a darker band of contractile protoplasm. When this 
band of protoplasm contracts, the stalk presents the appearance 
of a corkscrew. As it relaxes itself, the elasticity of the cuticle, 
which forms the remainder of the thickness of the stalk, is free 
to act, and the stalk again straightens itself. The alternate 
contractions and relaxations of the contractile protoplasm are 
not rhythmical, but only occur when the animal is touched by 
some foreign body, or when the water in which it is living is 
disturbed. When this occurs, and the deeper part of the 
protoplasm of the ectosarc contracts, the result is that both the 
stalk contracts and the peristome becomes partially shut over 
the retracted disc, so that the animal appears not unlike a 
minute ball attached to the end of a corkscrew. 

The endosarc, as in the Amoeba, consists of a more fluid 
granular protoplasm, which contains (circulating in it) food 
vacuoles which get rid of their water so as to bring the food 
into direct contact with the protoplasm, the water again collect- 
ing to form a single pulsating or contractile vacuole which is 
situated between the disc and the vestibule, and which dis- 
charges itself into the vestibule. 

The pulsating vacuole acts as an excretory organ for getting 
rid of water which holds in solution the soluble waste products. 
The nucleus is a long horseshoe-shaped body lying in the 
endosarc. It is readily made plain by staining the animal with 
magenta. In addition to the nucleus a smaller body has been 
described which lies close to the nucleus but not in it, and 
the name paranucleus has been given to it. 

Reproduction. — Three forms of reproduction are described 
as occurring in the Vorticella. 

i. Fission. — The animal grows broad, and divides in a 



Digitized 



by Google 



VORTICELLA. 



181 



longitudinal direction into two parts, each of which contains 
half of the nucleus, half of the endosarc, and half of the 
ectosarc. The stalk, however, does not divide, but one half of 
the animal retains the whole of the stalk, whilst the other half 
develops close to its base a zone of cilia, called the aboral 




Fig. ioi.— Vorticella microstoma (after Stein) : a, in process of fission ; N, nucleus ; 
a, gullet: b, fission completed and aboral pole of cilia developed on free 
individual ; «/, peristomial cilia : c, vorticella in process of conjugation; K, the 
small forms attached. 

circlet of cilia. It then drops off the stalk and swims freely, 
its aboral circlet of cilia causing it to move in a rotatory manner 
through the water, until it strikes some object to which it can 
adhere by its base. It then develops a new stalk of its own. 

2. Conjugation. — This does not appear to occur frequently. 
A small free-swimming Vorticella, formed by the rapid and 
repeated division of a large form, fuses with an ordinary large 



Digitized 



by Google 



1 82 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

stalked form. The large Vorticella absorbs the small one into 
itself, with the result that it seems to renew its youth, and is 
capable of recommencing active division in the manner 
described before. 

3. The third form, which is called Encystment with spore 
formation, is of rather doubtful occurrence. The description 
given is, that an ordinary stalked Vorticella, either after con- 
jugation with a small free-swimming form has taken place or 
without conjugation, becomes separated from its stalk, and 
develops a firm, thick membrane around itself. Then after 
remaining quiet for some time, its protoplasm breaks up into 
spores, which are round or oval bodies. The enclosing mem- 
brane or cyst then ruptures, setting free the small bodies ; each 
of these then develops a basal circlet of cilia, by means of 
which it swims freely. After a short free-swimming stage it 
adheres to a piece of weed or other body, and then develops 
a stalk and circlet of cilia around the disc, and grows up into a 
new Vorticella. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XVIII. 
GREGARIN^E. 

GREGARINIDiE belong to the Sporozoa, one of the classes 
into which the Protozoa have been divided. Leuckart 
defines them as " unicellular parasites of definite form, without 
pseudopodia or cilia, but covered by a smooth more or less firm 
cuticle." At their anterior ends there are not infrequently 
organs of attachment, like probosces or cushions. They are 
generally found associated together in large numbers (hence 
the name). Their movements are inconspicuous, wormlike, 
or slightly amoeboid. They live wholly as parasites, and 
receive their food by endosmosis. In some animals they are 
found in almost every specimen examined. Sometimes they 
occur in the body-cavity, sometimes in the intestine, the largest 
known Gregarina having its home in the rectum of the Lobster, 
and sometimes in other organs, as for instance, the seminal 
vesicles of the Earth-worm. 

At present they are only known to occur in Invertebrates. 
They especially infest Crustaceans, Insects, and Worms. 

Closely allied forms, the Coccidia and the organisms known 
by the name of Psorosperms, occur in large numbers in 
Mammalia. 

The family of the Gregarinidae is divided into two main 

groups, the Monocystidia in which the cell is undivided, and 

t8 3 



Digitized 



by Google 



184 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

the Polycystidia, in which it is divided into two chambers. 
The former chiefly occur in Worms, the latter chiefly in 
Insects, Lobsters, and Crayfish. 

The Gregarina lives in a very protected situation, either within 
the intestine or in some other organ of the animal upon which 
it is parasitic. It is, therefore, unnecessary for it to develop 
a rigid resistant ectosarc to serve as a protective covering. 
The result of the less rigid nature of the ectosarc is that the 
animal can readily change its shape. Again, owing to there 
being no necessity for a very resistant cuticle, fluids can be 
readily absorbed by the endosarc through the ectosarc. The 
animal obtains all its nourishment in a liquid form, for its host, 
by means of its digestive juices, converts all the food it obtains 
into a rich nourishing liquid. The Gregarina lives in this 
liquid, and absorbs it through its walls. 

This mode of life renders a mouth unnecessary, and in 
consequence the animal does not possess one. Reproduc- 
tion takes place by means of more or less hard-shelled spores 
(pseudonavicellae), which are formed in the interior of the adult, 
sometimes in very great numbers. Sooner or later, there 
generally develop in these spores small sickle-shaped bodies, 
which creep out and become new parasites. The number of 
these varies, but usually there are not many of them ; occasion- 
ally the contents of the spore are collected in a single amoeboid 
embryo. 

Anatomy. — The body of the Gregarina is more or less ex- 
tended. The protoplasm, of which it consists, is divided into 
two parts, a clear external layer, the ectosarc, which is provided 
with a thin cuticle; and a granular internal portion, the 
endosarc, in which there is a large nnclens, containing a 
nucleolus. The deeper portions of the ectosarc occasionally 
present a distinct striation, similar to the myophan striation 



Digitized 



by Google 



GREGARINjE. 



185 



in the Vorticella. It has been stated that the granules in 
the endoplasm sometimes give a starch-like reaction with 
iodine. Occasionally the endoplasm is coloured yellow with 
changed blood-pigments which the animal has absorbed from 
its host. No contractile vacuole is ever present ; occasionally, 
though rarely, one or more small vacuoles are seen. 




Fig. 102.— Gregarina (after Stein and Kolliker). a, Gregarina oligacanthus from 
intestine of a Dragon fly; b, Gregarina polymorpha from the intestine of a Meal 
beetle during conjugation ; c, in process of encystment ; d, encysted Gregarina; 
e, formation of pseudonavicellae ; /, pseudonavicella cyst with ripe pseudo- 
navicellae. 

Those forms inhabiting the intestines are often provided 
with hooks at one end, and sometimes with suckers, by means 
of which they cling to the intestinal walls of their host. These 
hooks do not persist through life, but fall off sooner or later. 

It is not rare to find two Gregarinae attached together by their 
suckers. This sometimes occurs in young forms, and may be 



Digitized 



by Google 



i86 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

quite independent of the pairing which takes place during the 
process of conjugation. 

The two-chambered form differs in no essential particular from the 
one-chambered, for though the animal has been divided by an ingrowth of 
the ectosarc into two chambers, yet it is still unicellular, the nucleus 
remaining unchanged. The partition between the two chambers is only a 
septum, which has developed as the animal approached adult age. The 
larger or posterior chamber retains the nucleus. The formation of this 
septum never indicates approaching fission, nor indeed is it known to have 
any special significance. It only occurs in the forms which inhabit the 
alimentary canal. 

Reproduction and Life History. — Two, or occasionally three 
or more, adult forms may unite together end to end with 
their long axes lying in the same straight line. If reproduc- 
tion is going to take place, this will be the first stage in 
a process of conjugation. The Gregarinae soon contract 
and surround themselves with a gelatinous wall not unlike 
cellulose in appearance, but of quite different chemical com- 
position. This gelatinous wall is called a cyst, and the process 
is described as encystment (fig. 102). Whilst this encystment 
is taking place the individuals become completely fused 
together. Occasionally a single Gregarinae will encyst itself 
and go through the stages of reproduction exactly in the same 
way as though conjugation had taken place. The contents of 
the cyst now rapidly divide (exactly how has not yet been 
observed), into a number of small ovoid spore-like bodies. 
These bodies are probably nucleated, but so far no nuclei have 
been proved to exist. The spore-like bodies soon elongate 
into spindle-shaped organisms, each one developing around 
itself a horny, colourless coat. These spindle-shaped bodies 
are called Pseudonavicellae ; the cyst is described as a pseudo- 
navicella cyst. After a time the cyst ruptures, and the 
pseudonavicellae are set free. The protoplasm of each 



Digitized 



by Google 



GREGARINA. 187 

pseudonavicella becomes divided up into several small sickle- 
shaped bodies, each of which is called a falciform body or 
corpuscle. Later on these falciform bodies are set free from 
the pseudonavicella by the rupture of its horny coat ; each one 
is then generally found to be provided with a short vibratile 
process by means of which it moves about until it reaches a 
cell of its host. It then makes its way into the cell, and 
takes up its abode in it. Within this cell it develops at 
the expense of the protoplasm until it is able to take up 
nourishment from the nutrient fluids of the host which bathe 
the cell. It thus increases rapidly in size, stretching and 
eventually rupturing the cell that has given it house room. It 
may now remain in the same place, or it may be carried to 
some other organ of the body from that in which it has 
developed. In either case it undergoes further development 
until it reaches the form and appearance of the adult 
Gregarina. 

It is not improbable, that in some cases the pseudonavicella cyst escapes 
from the host, wherein the adult Gregarina has lived, in the intestinal forms 
with the faeces, or in the forms inhabiting the seminal vesicle of the earth- 
worm, either by the death of the worm or possibly after rupture of the 
pseudonavicella cyst. The pseudonavicellae may pass down the male genital 
ducts of their host, and thus get to the exterior. The pseudonavicellae, or 
sometimes the whole cyst, may be eaten by another animal, in which rupture 
or digestion of the horny coat of the pseudonavicella may take place, with 
the result that the falciform bodies are set free ', they would then bore their 
way into the cells of this their intermediate host and there develop as before 
described, finding their way into the final host after the death of the 
intermediate host. The above life history of intermediate and final hosts is 
not improbably a true one, but it has not been proved to occur, and it 
seems undoubtedly the case that the whole of the life history can be passed in a 
single animal. The life history of the Gregarinoe presents many points that 
have not yet been conclusively decided ; the difficulty of following out the 
various processes is very great, and the observations that have been made 
by different observers do not always agree. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XIX. 
HYDRA. 

THE animals so far studied have all been unicellular. 
In them the single cell has to perform all the necessary 
functions for the maintenance of life and for the reproduction 
of the species. There has been differentiation, but it has only 
been differentiation of protoplasm. Thus the ectosarc serves 
as a protective covering, and in some cases, as in the 
Vorticella, can be subdivided into a contractile portion and a 
cuticular portion. The endosarc, on the other hand, digests 
the food, and gets rid of waste products, etc. This differen- 
tiation is of the greatest importance, but it is evident that, if 
the animal were to increase much in size and complexity, it 
would be manifestly to its advantage that instead of consisting 
of one cell, the protoplasm of which was very much diffentiated, 
it should consist of many cells, the cells themselves being 
differentiated off into groups, and the work of the whole 
animal being divided into various parts, each part being 
performed by a group of cells. This, of course, is only 
repeating what has been already said in the description of 
tissues. 

The Hydra is a multicellular animal, in which the differen- 
tiation of protoplasm and of cells has only taken place to a 
limited extent, but quite sufficiently to place it on a much 
higher level than the Amoeba, the Vorticella, or the Gregarina. 

188 



Digitized 



by Google 



HYDRA. 



189 



In the Hydra the cells are arranged in two layers, an outer 
layer or skin called the ectoderm, and an inner layer called the 




JfiG. 103.— Hydra ; a diagrammatic longitudinal section of a specimen with ripe 
reproductive organs, and with a fully formed bud (from Marshall). A, mouth j 
B, hypostome ; C, enteron or digestive cavity ; D, ectoderm ; £", supporting 
lamella ; F, endoderm ; G, cavity of one of the tentacles ; H, testis ; /, ripe 
ovum in the ovary ; K, fully formed bud with mouth and tentacles ; L, root by 
which the Hytfra is attached to a piece of weed. 

endoderm. These terms, ectoderm and endoderm, the inner 
and outer skins, must not be confused with the terms 
ectoplasm and endoplasm, the inner and outer layers of 



Digitized 



by Google 



190 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 

protoplasm in the unicellular animals. This arrangement of 
cells forms a two-layered sac, which has a mouth at one end 
opening to the exterior. This sac is the primitive alimentary 
canal or enteron. 

The adult Hydra bears a close similarity to the higher animals in the 
diblastula or gastrula phase, described under Development. The animals 
like the Hydra, in which this diblastula condition is the ultimate one, 
development proceeding no farther, are grouped together under the name 
of the Ccelenterata. 

The Hydra is a fresh-water animal, readily seen with the 
naked eye. It is occasionally found in ponds and ditches, 
attached by its base, or so-called foot, to stones or weeds. It 
prefers, however, to live in shallow, clear streams, where the 
water is not flowing too rapidly. Three species commonly 
occur in England, the Hydra viridis, distinguished by its green 
colour and small size, the Hydra fusca which is brown, and 
the Hydra vulgaris which is almost colourless. 

Anatomy. — The animal consists of a tubular body, the wall 
of which is composed of two layers of cells. The cavity or 
enteron is closed at one end but open at the other. The 
opening is called the mouth. It can readily be distended for 
taking in food. Around the mouth the body wall is produced 
into six or eight blunt processes or tentacles, each of which 
consists of a wall and a cavity, which are the direct continuation 
of the body wall and the digestive cavity. When fully ex- 
tended they may be twice the length of the body, whilst when 
contracted they appear only as short, blunt projections around 
the mouth. The so-called foot is the closed end of the body. 
It is somewhat club-shaped, and keeps a firm hold on the 
stone or other object to which the Hydra is attached, by 
spreading itself out on its surface. The animal can alternately 
contract and relax this foot, thereby giving rise to a slow 



Digitized 



by Google 



HYDRA. 



191 



crawling movement. Around the mouth, forming a circular 
lip to it, is the hypostome. 

Minute structure. — If a thin transverse or longitudinal 
section be made through the body wall of a Hydra, a micro- 
scopical examination can readily be made of the cells of which 




Fig. 104.— Hydra viridis;a small portion of a longitudinal section through the body- 
wall (from Marshall). A, one of the large ectoderm cells ; £, nucleus of the 
same ; C, muscular process of the same ; £>, an undischarged nematocyst lying 
within its parent cell or cnidoblast ; E, cnidocil ; F, a nematocyst with discharged 
thread ; G, interstitial cell ; H t supporting lamella; /, endodermcell; K t vacuole; 
L, nucleus, N, flagellum of same ; M t chlorophyll corpuscle. 

the animal is composed. The whole thickness of the body- 
wall may be seen to consist of three parts — an outer layer of 
cells, the ectoderm ; an inner layer of cells lining the digestive 
cavity, the endoderm ; and a third, very thin gelatinous layer, 
which can only be seen with some difficulty owing to its 
transparency, and which separates the ectoderm from the 



Digitized 



by Google 



192 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

endoderm, called the structureless or supporting lamella 
or mesogloea. The ectoderm consists of four kinds of cells 
which differ in their functions, and have a corresponding 
difference in shape, size, and appearance. The large ectoderm 
cells form a single layer covering the whole surface of the body, 
including the tentacles. It will be observed from the figure 
(fig. 104) that each of these large cells touches its neighbour 
by its wide ends. The surface formed by the upper ends 
is developed into a horny cuticle. The lower ends of the 
cells form muscular processes which are spread out on the 
structureless lamella. In the spaces left between the bodies 
of the large cells, numerous small rounded cells (interstitial 
cells) are packed. Amongst these there are a large number 
which have become specialised; they are called cnidoblasts, 
and in each there is a thread cell or nematocyst, which 
contains a spirally wound thread. The cnidoblast, after the 
formation of the thread cell, remains as a capsule to it. There 
is a small projection (cnidocil) from it, which stretches beyond 
the free surface of the animal. 

If the cnidocil be touched, the thread cell at once throws out 
its thread, which is turned inside out (evaginated). The thread 
is coated with some irritating fluid, and thus the animal is pro- 
vided with a kind of weapon, which it can shoot out at an 
enemy or at prey. Sometimes the whole thread cell is shot 
out ; it is able to stick on to the enemy, as it is provided with 
barbs at the base of the thread. Each nematocyst possesses a 
well-marked nucleus. 

In addition to the above kinds of cells some star-shaped 
ganglionic cells occur. These are nervous in function, and 
are in special relationship, by means of fine connections, with 
the thread cells, and with the contractile muscular processes 
of the large ectoderm cells. 



Digitized 



by Google 



HYDRA. 193 

The endoderm consists of a single layer of large cells with 
well-marked vacuoles. Processes, somewhat similar to the 
pseudopodia of the Amoeba, are sent out by these cells into 
the digestive cavity, and food particles are taken in by them, 
exactly as in the Amoeba. The endoderm cells also bear 
permanent processes, which wave about in the digestive 
cavity. These are similar to cilia, only they are larger. They 
are called flagella. Muscular processes to the endoderm cells 
have also been described; they are said to run transversely 
around the body as opposed to the longitudinal direction of 
the muscular processes of the ectoderm cells. In the Hydra 
viridis, the endoderm cells contain numerous chlorophyll 
corpuscles, which resemble the chlorophyll corpuscles in 
plants, in having the same power of absorbing and decom- 
posing carbon dioxide and of setting free oxygen in the 
presence of sunlight. In the Hydra fusca similar bodies 
are found, but they contain no chlorophyll. 

Both the tentacles and the body of the Hydra are extremely 
contractile. The animal, if frightened or injured, can contract 
up into a very small compass. This is brought about by 
means of the muscular processes of the large ectoderm cells. 
As before mentioned the animal can crawl slowly by means of 
its foot, but it can move much more rapidly, by fixing its mouth, 
contracting the body, then fixing the foot, letting go the mouth, 
extending the body, fixing the mouth again, contracting the 
body, and so on. 

The Hydra feeds chiefly upon other animals. By the 
constant and rapid movements of its tentacles it can search 
for its food over a considerable area. When it meets with an 
animal that it can attack, it paralyses it by discharging a volley 
of thread cells at it. Then it takes it in through its distensible 
mouth, and digests it at leisure. 

13 



Digitized 



by Google 



194 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

Digestion takes place in the Hydra in two ways : (i) As in the 
Amoeba, by taking particles of food directly into the endoderm 
cells, i.e. by intracellular digestion, and (2) by acting on the 
food in the enteron, by pouring upon it digestive juices, and 
when digestion has taken place, that is, when the food is 
rendered soluble, by absorbing this solution. This is called 
intercellular digestion, or digestion between or outside the 
cells. It is necessary, however, in intercellular digestion, that 
the food should come into contact with the surface of the 
endoderm cells. 

Reproduction. — The Hydra reproduces itself in two ways, 
asexually and sexually. 

Asexual reproduction or gemmation. — This consists in the 
outgrowth, from some part of the body, of a hollow bud, 
which first acquires a mouth and tentacles, and then becomes 
constricted at the base, in order to shut off communication 
between the enteron of the child and that of the parent. Two 
or three buds may develop at the same time from the same 
animal. 

Another mode of asexual reproduction has been artificially 
induced. The animal was cut up into several pieces, and it was 
observed that those which contained both ectoderm and 
endoderm grew into perfect Hydrse. This mode of repro- 
duction by fission is not known to occur naturally. 

Sexual reproduction. — The Hydra is hermaphrodite, the 
same individual bearing both male and female organs. There 
may be numerous testes on the same animal, and sometimes, but 
more rarely, several ovaries (Hydra fusca). Both ovaries and 
testes are very simple, and apparently self-fertilisation can take 
place. In this the Hydra is unlike most hermaphrodite 
animals, in which self-fertilisation is not possible, there being 
various contrivances to prevent its occurrence. 



Digitized 



by Google 



HYDRA. 19 



Both the testis and the ovary develop from groups of interstitial 
cells. In the case of the testis, a group of interstitial cells multi- 
plies, until it has formed a heap projecting from the surface of 
the animal. The outer cells then take on a protective function, 
whilst the cells in the interior of the heap become directly 
transformed into spermatozoa. These escape when ripe, the 
nuclei forming the heads, and the protoplasm the long tails, 
by the lashing movements of which the spermatozoa make 
their way through the water to the egg cell. 

An ovary develops in a similar manner by the multiplication 
of a group of interstitial cells ; but whereas in the testis all the 
central cells develop into spermatozoa, in the ovary it is only 
one of the central cells that develops into an ovum or 
egg cell. This one grows at the expense of the rest, until it 
entirely fills up the space within the outer protecting cells. 
As soon as the ovum is quite ripe, the capsule formed by the 
protecting cells ruptures, the polar bodies are extruded, and 
through the rupture a spermatozoon makes its way into the egg 
cell, which thus becomes fertilised. 

The Development of the Hydra. — After fertilisation, segmen- 
tation at once begins ; the ovum surrounds itself with a hard 
thick capsule, and, becoming detached from the parent, falls 
to the bottom of the pond in which the animal is living. 

The further stages of development have been differently 
described by different observers. According to one authority, 
as the result of segmentation, a solid morula is formed, con- 
sisting of a single layer of cells, each of which divides into 
two, so as to form two layers, the ectoderm and endoderm. 
Next, a cavity develops in the middle of the mass, and thus a 
closed diblastula or gastrula is formed. If this be the true 
account, the development would be by pure delamination, the 
cavity, which develops in the centre of the mass, being only 



Digitized 



by Google 



196 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

an increase in size of the already existing, but minute, 
segmentation cavity. According to another observer, the 
segmentation of the ovum results in the formation of a 
hollow morula or blastosphere, with a well-developed seg- 
mentation cavity. From one part of this blastosphere, ceHs 
are budded off which migrate inwards, and fill up the seg- 
mentation cavity, thus forming a more or less solid mass inside 
the original layer. These cells ultimately form the endodfcrm. 
In the centre a cavity develops, which is the enteron or 
alimentary canal. This mode of formation of the diblastula is 
a modified form of delamination, and is called the immigration 
form of delamination. Whether the former or the latter 
description is correct, the result is the same ; namely, that a 
closed two-layered sac is formed, which is surrounded by its 
chitinoid (capsule secreted by the ectoderm cells) ; this capsule 
soon bursts, and the embryo escapes ; it then elongates itself, 
the sac becomes ruptured at one end to form the mouth, and 
around the mouth, tentacles bud out. Thus a young Hydra 
similar to the parent is formed. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XX. 
THE LIVER-FLUKE. 

THE Flukes are parasitic unsegmented flat Worms, with 
leaf-shaped bodies ; they possess a month and two ven- 
trally placed suckers or organs of attachment. The intestine 
is forked and without an anus. The Liver-fluke {JDistomum 
hepaticum) is very frequently found in the liver of the Sheep, 
being sometimes present in large numbers in the bile ducts. 
It produces the disease known as sheep rot. It may occur in 
Man, and in many other animals, and is not confined to the 
liver, though that is the place where it is most frequently 
found. At one stage of its existence, it inhabits the Pond-snail. 
The adult animal is about i \ inches long. 

In the Hydra we have seen a multicellular animal, which 
has only a simple structure. It consists of only two layers of 
cells ; i^t has at most the merest trace of a nervous system, no 
special organs for getting rid of waste products, a very simple 
digestif cavity, and very simple reproductive organs. In the 
Fluke, we have to study an animal in which all the above 
systems are complicated ; that is, an animal in which differen- 
tiation has taken place to a much greater extent than it has in 
the Hydra. The complicated nature of the anatomy and the 
life history of the Fluke is, however, largely due to the fact that 
it is a parasite. Its mode of existence renders some organs 



Digitized 



by Google 



198 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

unnecessary, so that they tend to disappear ; but on the other 
hand the difficulties of maintaining the species are so great, 
that it is provided with a most complex generative system, and 
the young pass through various phases before they reach 
maturity. 

Anatomy. — The adult Liver-fluke is about i \ inches long and 
\ an inch broad at its widest part. It is of a flattened ovoid 
shape, and is much broader at its anterior than at its posterior 
end. There is a blunt projection from its anterior end which is 
roughly triangular in shape, and at the end of this there is a cup- 
shaped sucker, in the middle of which the oval mouth is placed. 

The ventral sucker or second organ of attachment is also 
cup shaped; it lies on the ventral surface just behind the 
junction of the triangular projection with the broader portion 
of the body. Both suckers are well supplied with strands of 
muscle, which enable them to hold on with considerable 
tenacity to anything to which they may attach themselves. 

The whole surface of the body is covered with a cuticle, 
which is provided with numerous spines. 

The Alimentary system. — The alimentary canal consists of a 
mouth, a pharynx, an oesophagus, and an intestine. The mouth 
is oval, and is placed in the middle of the anterior sucker. 
The pharynx is oval, and its walls are well provided with 
muscles. It leads into the oesophagus, which is a very short, 
straight, thin-walled tube. This again leads into the intestine, 
which is a forked tube ending blindly. The intestine divides 
almost immediately into the two forks, one on the right, and 
one on the left, each of which runs to the hinder end of the 
body, giving off numerous short branches on its inner side, 
and many large branches, which subdivide again into smaller 
branches, on the outer side. None of the branches open to 
the exterior, nor, having once left the main trunk, do they 



Digitized 



by Google 




Fig. 105.— Distomum hepaticum (from Marshall after Sommer). The alimentary and 
nervous systems are shown only on the left side, and the excretory system only 
on the right. A, right main division of the alimentary canal ; C, one of its 
diverticula; CS t cirrus sac ; D, left anterior dorsal trunk of excretory system ; 
G, lateral ganglion; M t main trunk of excretory system; N t lateral nerve; 
O, mouth ; P, pharynx ; S, ventral sucker ; V, left anterior ventral trunk of 
excretory system ; X, excretory pore. 



Digitized 



by Google 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



communicate with each other. There is no anus, nor has 
the digestive system any glands connected with it. 

The Excretory system.— This consists of a complicated 
system of branched ducts, which open internally to the body- 
cavity, and externally by a median pore. The small-branched 
ducts commence by ciliated funnels, which open into the 
body-cavity. The ducts anastomose freely with one another, 
and finally open into longer transverse ducts, which open into 
a tube of considerable size, called the main duct. This is 
formed by the union of four anterior ducts, a pair of dorsal, 
and a pair of ventral, which unite just opposite the broadest 
part of the animal, and run from this point directly backwards 
to open to the exterior by the terminal median pore. 

The body-cavity, or coelom, into which the ciliated funnels 
open, is represented by a series of spaces or lacunae, which 
occur between the branched alimentary canal and the body 
wall. 

The branched condition of the alimentary canal allows 
nourishment to be readily carried to all regions of the body, 
and so does away with the necessity of any special apparatus 
for the distribution of food. Further, as the animal is parasitic 
within other animals, it gets its food in a liquid form; hence 
no biting or masticating organs are required. Again all its food 
is digestible, so that there are no solid residues to get rid of, 
and hence the animal has no need of an anus. Soluble waste 
products, produced by the activity of the protoplasm of the 
cells, there are in plenty, and these are got rid of by means of 
the excretory system. 

The Nervous system can only be seen with some difficulty. 
It consists of a nerve collar which surrounds the pharynx, and 
which has upon it three collections of nerve cells or ganglia. 
One of the ganglia is on the ventral surface of the nerve collar, 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE LIVER-FLUKE. 201 



and short nerve branches arise from it to supply the surround- 
ing organs. The other two ganglia (the lateral ganglia) occur 
one on each side of the nerve collar ; from each of these there 
is a long lateral nerve, which extends to the posterior end of 
the body, giving off numerous branches on its course to the 
various parts. 

Unproductive system. — The genital aperture is on the 
ventral surface of the animal between the two suckers. The 
reproductive system, as in most parasites, is very complicated, 
the complexity being still further increased by male and female 
organs both being present in the same individual, that is, by 
the animal being hermaphrodite. 

The Male organs consist of two much-branched testes, which 
lie, one behind the other, in the middle part of the body, ex- 
tending over about half its length and half its width. Each 
testis has, arising from about its middle, a tube, the vas 
deferens. The two vasa deferentia run forward as far as the 
ventral sucker, where they open into an elongated sac, the 
vesicula seminalis. Opening out of the seminal vesicle and 
forming a narrow continuation of it, there is a fine tube, the 
ejaculatory duct, which runs to the end of the penis. The 
penis is a well-developed, muscular organ, forming, as it were, 
an enlarged continuation of the ejaculatory duct; it can be 
protruded by a process of evagination from the genital pore. 
•The vesicula seminalis, the ductus ejaculatorius, with a small 
accessory gland which surrounds it, and the penis when with- 
drawn, all lie within a sac-like space between the ventral sucker 
V \ and the genital aperture. This is called the cirrus-sac. 

The Female organs are still more complicated. At the base 
of the penis, when it is withdrawn, there is a small space 
called the genital sinus, into the left side of which the 
oviduct opens. If the oviduct be traced backwards, it will be 



Digitized 



by Google 



202 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



found to be a thick-walled, much-convoluted tube, lying 
between the genital aperture and the commencement of the 
testes. Its convolutions extend halfway across the animal, 




Fig. 106.— Distomum hepaticum (after Sommer). O, mouth ; D, limb of intestine ; 
5, sucker ; T, testes ; Do, yolk gland ; Ov, uterus ; Dr t accessory glands. 

and it may be seen to contain numerous eggs. It is often 
called the uterus. At its termination it receives two ducts, 
one from the ovary, the other from the yolk glands. 
The ovary is branched and tubular, looking not unlike the 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE LIVER-FLUKE. 203 

testis but smaller; it lies on the right side in front of the 
anterior testis, and the various branches unite together to 
form a fine tube, the ovarian duct, which opens into the uterus 
(oviduct). The Shell gland lies in the middle line. It is a 
glandular mass, which surrounds the termination of the ducts 
from the ovary, and also the median duct from the yolk glands, 
just at the point where they unite to form the uterus or 
oviduct. 

The Yolk glands consist of a very large number of small 
rounded masses, which lie on either side of the body, ex- 
tending along its whole length. Each collection of yolk glands 
extends from the outer margin inwards for a quarter of the 
width of the worm. 

The Vitellarian ducts. — Each yolk gland has connected with 
it a fine duct (a vitellarian duct). These ducts all unite to 
form an anterior and a posterior duct on either side. The 
anterior and posterior ducts unite about the junction of the 
anterior and middle thirds of the animal, to form a transverse 
duct which runs inwards and opens into a small pouch, called 
the yolk reservoir. From this a short duct, the median 
vitellarian duct, runs, which joins with the ovarian duct to 
form the uterus or oviduct. Just at the junction of the median 
vitellarian duct and the uterus, there is a small duct, which is 
said to open to the exterior on the dorsal surface of the 
animal, and is called the vagina or " canal of Lauren'' 

life history. — The adult Liver-fluke, having developed eggs 
in its ovary, passes them into the ovarian duct. They are 
probably fertilised whilst on their way to the uterus, either by 
spermatozoa from the same animal or from another animal. 
After fertilisation the eggs pass into the uterus ; they are there 
supplied with yolk cells from the yolk glands, and become 
encased in horny shells by the shell gland. The eggs then 



Digitized 



by Google 




FIG. 17 EJG-19 

Jtue * ao 

Fig. 107.— Fasciola hepatica. Five stages in the life history (Marshall and Hurst, 
after Thomas). Fig. 15, the free swimming embryo; fig. 16, a sporocyst 
containing developing rediae ; fig. 17, a young redia ; fig. 18, an adult redia 
containing one daughter redia (DR)> two cercariae nearly mature (C)» and germs 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE LIVER-FLUKE. 205 



grow rapidly in size and are passed out of the body by the 
aperture at the base of the penis, and are thus ejected into the 
bile ducts of the sheep or other animal in which the Fluke is 
living. They then pass through the bile ducts with the bile 
into the intestine of the host, and then escape from the body 
with the faeces. 

Each egg is an ovoid body, '13 mm. long and *o8 mm. broad, 
enclosed in a smooth brown horny shell, and containing a single 
germ cell and numerous yolk cells. As soon as the egg is 
laid, active development commences, and proceeds rapidly 
until an embryo is formed within the shell. At the same time 
one end of the shell becomes separated from the rest to form 
an operculum or lid, and it is through the opening thus formed, 
that the embryo escapes. The free-swimming embryo is 
conical in shape ; it can swim rapidly by means of the cilia 
covering its body ; its ectoderm consists of a single layer of 
flattened cells enclosing a mass of granular ones, and it has 
two eye spots, a head papilla, and a pair of ciliated funnels. 
Usually it lives for only about eight hours ; if during this time 
it is so fortunate as to meet with a small pond-snail (the in- 
termediate host to the Fluke) the head papilla will elongate, 
and the animal will bore its way into the snail's body. As soon 
as it arrives at a suitable resting-place, such as the pulmonary 
chamber, changes at once begin to take place, the cilia dis- 
appear, the ectoderm cells swell, and after an interval of two 

in various stages ; fig. 19, a free cercaria. CC, cytogenous cells of cercaria ; 
DT, the digestive tract ; F, head papilla ; H, eye spots ; H', the same degener- 
ating ; K> germinal cell ; L, epaulet-like cells of • first row of ectoderm cells ; 
M, embryo in optical section, gastrula stage j JV, pharynx of redia ; O, digestive 
sac ; OE, oesophagus of cercaria ; P, lips of redia ; Q, collar of redia ; R, pro- 
cesses of redia serving as rudimentary feet ; S, embryos between the morula 
and gastrula stages ; T, trabecular crossing body-cavity of redia ; U, cells 
in redia supposed to be glandular ; V, birth opening by which cercariae and 
daughter rediae escape from the redia ; W } morula still retained in the body, 
wall ; IV y larger morula ; Y t oral sucker of cercaria ; Y* t ventral sucker ; 
Z) pharynx of cercaria. 



Digitized 



by Google 



206 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

or three weeks the embryo has grown into an elongated sac 
•6 mm. in length. 

Sporocyst. — This elongated sac is called the sporocyst; 
occasionally it divides into two similar sporocysts, but this 
only rarely occurs. 

So far, we have seen that, as the result of the sexual act, 
fertilised eggs are produced, which, under suitable conditions, 
develop into sporocysts. The sporocyst now gives rise, by 
internal budding, to a number of young animals, called redise, 
and thus a second (asexual) generation is produced. These 
pass through a solid morula and a gastrula stage whilst still 
within the sporocyst. Later on they burst their way through 
the wall of the sporocyst, and then develop into adults, becom- 
ing elongated and provided with alimentary canals, in the form 
of short blind sacs. After a redia has made its way out of 
the sporocyst, the opening closes and the sporocyst goes on pro- 
ducing others. The adult redia, in addition to the alimentary 
canal, possesses definite excretory canals, which commence in 
the body-cavity as ciliated funnels. From the internal surface 
of the body-wall new buds are given off, which generally 
develop into new rediae. Thus there may be several genera- 
tions, but finally and sometimes without the first redia pro- 
ducing rediae at all, cercariae are produced. To recapitulate 
the sporocyst gives rise to rediae, which may in their turn 
simply produce rediae over again, but finally cercariae are 
produced. The cercaria develops exactly like a redia up to 
the gastrula stage, but after that, whilst still within the body of 
the parent redia, it becomes very different. It develops a mouth, 
a pharynx, and an oesophagus; and below these, a forked 
alimentary canal ; a long tail, and two suckers also make their 
appearance. These fully-formed cercariae now escape from 
the redia by an aperture just behind the collar ; they wriggle 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE LIVER-FLUKE. 207 

themselves out of the Snail into the water or on to the grass, 
and attach themselves to any object, such as grass stalks, etc., 
near which they happen to be. Each cercaria then soon loses 
its tail, and surrounds itself with a membrane; that is, it 
encysts itself. If the encysted cercaria is then eaten by a 
Sheep or other animal, fit to form its final host, it resumes its 
activity, emerging from its cyst, and passing along the bile 
ducts of the animal until it reaches the liver, where it takes up 
its permanent abode. In about six weeks it is mature. 

Thus we see that the sexually mature Fluke gives rise to 
eggs, which develop into sporocysts. These produce rediae 
asexually ; the rediae eventually produce cercariae still asexually, 
and the cercariae under favourable conditions grow up into 
adult Flukes. There is, therefore, a sexual generation followed 
by two or more asexual ones, the last of which is again followed 
by a sexual one. 

The disease of liver rot in Sheep is a common one, and is 
often very fatal to large numbers of the affected animals ; it 
has been known to destroy as many as a million sheep in one 
year in Great Britain alone. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XXI. 
TAPE-WORMS. 

THIS group forms one of the three divisions of the Platy- 
helminthes, the Trematodes forming the second, and 
the Turbellaria the third. 

Leuckart defines the Tape-worms as " flat worms without 
mouth or alimentary canal, which typically develop by alterna- 
tion of generations, by budding from a generally pear-shaped 
nurse or scolex, with which they remain united for a lengthened 
period as a ribbon-like colony or strobila. The individual 
joints of the colony, i.e. the sexual animals or proglottides, 
increase in size and maturity, as they are removed farther from 
their origin by the intercalation of new buds, but are not 
distinguished in any special way. The nurse, however, known 
by the name of the head (scolex), is provided with four or two 
suckers, and usually with curved claw-like hooks. The dorsal 
and ventral surfaces of the head are perfectly identical, so that 
the arrangement of the hooks presents a strikingly radiate 
appearance. By means of this apparatus, the worms fasten 
themselves on to the intestinal membrane of their hosts, which 
with only one exception, all belong to the Vertebrata. The 
nurses develop from little round six-hooked embryos in a 
more or less complicated fashion, as so-called bladder-worms. 
The latter inhabit very diverse, but usually parenchymatous, 
organs of the higher and lower animals, and are thence 



Digitized 



by Google 



TAPE-WORMS. 



209 



passively transferred to the intestine of their subsequent 
host." 

The simplest forms of Tape-worms possess only one segment 
or so-called joint, and are furnished with only one set of 
(hermaphrodite) reproductive organs. In some rather more 




1 



Fig. 108. 



Fig. 109. 



Fig. i 10. 



Fig. 108.— Head of Taenia solium, showing suckers and circlet of hooks (from 

Leuckart). 
Fig. 109.— Half-ripe and ripe joints of Taenia solium (from Leuckart). 
Fig. iio.— Two proglottides of Taenia solium showing uterus (from Leuckart). 

complex forms there are several sets of reproductive organs, 
but the external segmentation is incomplete. In all those that 
infest the intestine of man, there are numerous distinct joints, 
in each of which there is a single set of reproductive organs. 

Ordinary Tape-worms may be said to occupy an intermediate 
position between segmented and unsegmented Worms, for 
though they have numerous similar joints, these are to a 

14 



Digitized 



by Google 



210 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

certain extent independent of each other, and are readily got 
rid of, without causing any apparent inconvenience to the 
animal. A Tape-worm can therefore hardly be described as 
a single, many-jointed organism, but must rather be termed a 
collection or colony of organisms, only to a certain limited 
extent mutually interdependent. 

Life history of the Taenia solium. — The head of this worm is 
furnished with a circlet of hooks and four suckers, by means 
of which it fixes itself on to the mucous membrane of the 
intestine of its host. As this is the only point of attachment, 
the worm hangs freely in the intestinal canal. The terminal 
joints, as they become ripe, drop off from the parent, and are 
passed down the intestine to the exterior, sometimes one by 
one, and sometimes several joined together. Each ripe joint 
or proglottis is a sac, which has some power of muscular con- 
traction, and which is distended with minute embryos enclosed 
in firm egg shells. The proglottis, having been passed into 
water or on to damp soil, soon ruptures, thus setting free its 
brood of embryos enclosed in their shells. Should either the 
unruptured proglottis or some of these eggs be swallowed by 
a pig (the intermediate host), the resistent egg shells become 
dissolved by the pig's digestive juices, and the embryos are set 
free. 

The embryos of the Taenia solium have been found in the Reindeer, 
the Dog, and the Cat, but they only occur with frequency in the Pig and in 
Man. 

Each embryo has at its anterior end six hooks, by means of 
which it attaches itself to the mucous membrane of the 
intestine. It then at once begins to bore its way through the 
wall ; having accomplished this, it may fall into a blood-vessel 
on the other side, and so be carried by the blood stream to the 



Digitized 



by Google 



TAPE-WORMS. 



211 



liver, lungs, brain, eye, muscles, or rarely to other parts of the 
body ; or it may drop into the body-cavity. 

Having reached a resting place, the six-hooked embryo 
begins to develop. It becomes a passive, vegetative, asexual 
bladder-worm or proscolex, which after a few days is suffi- 
ciently large to be seen with the naked eye. Like any other 
foreign body it causes a proliferation of cells around it, which 




Fig. hi.— Stages in the development of Taenia solium to the Cysticercus stage 
(after Leuckart and Claus). a, egg with embryo ; 6, six-hooked free embryo ; 
c, rudiment of the head as a hollow papilla on the wall of the vesicle ; d, bladder- 
worm with retracted head j e, the same with protruded head, 'magnified about 
four times. 



form a connective tissue sheath enclosing a smooth serous 
cavity. As the embryo increases in size it becomes elongated, 
its hooks drop off, and its central cells enlarge, become clear, and 
then liquefy, forming a quantity of fluid, which fills the worm, 
and produces the bladder-like appearance to which its name of 
bladder-worm is due. In all the various Tape-worms, the name 
of cysticercus or hydatid is given to the embryos at this stage, 
the cysticercus of the Taenia solium being called the Cysti- 
cercus cellulosse. If the resting place is in a muscle the 



Digitized 



by Google 



212 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



worms appear as small ovoid bodies, lying between the muscle- 
fibres. 

At some part of the wall of the bladder there now appears a 
small thickening which soon grows inwards, forming a pouch in 
the bladder. The cuticle becomes invaginated at the same 
time, so that the appearance is that of a pushing in of the wall 




Fig. i i a^— Measly pork (natural size) (from Leuckart). 



of the bladder at one part. This invaginated portion develops 
into the head or scolex of the mature animal. 

At the same time that the invagination of the head is taking 
place, muscle is also developing in the walls of the head. At 
four points near the bottom of the invagination four suckers 
develop, and at the bottom of the cavity the circlet of hooks 
is produced. On the surface towards the bladder, a thin layer 
is seen to surround the head rudiment. This is called the 



Digitized 



by Google 



TAPE-WORMS. 213 



receptacle. The rudiments of the water vascular system also 
develop about this time. 

As soon as the head with its suckers and hooks, the rudi- 
ments of the water vascular system, and the muscle in the 
walls have been developed, the head becomes everted, so that 
the pouch now forms a projection on the top of the bladder ; 
in other words, the pouch becomes turned inside out, with the 
result that the suckers and hooks, developed at the bottom of 
the pouch, now form projections on the outer surface of the 
head. 

Having arrived at the stage of what appears now as a head 
with a bladder attached, development ceases for the time ; that 
is to say, the animal remains quiescent. It only develops 
further after it has entered its final host. Pork containing 
cysticerci is known as measled. If this be eaten by another Pig 
or by a Man, either raw or in an imperfectly cooked condition, 
that is to say, if some or all of the cysticerci pass alive into the 
alimentary canal, the worms will develop into adults. As 
soon as a worm arrives in the stomach, the bladder and neck 
are dissolved by the gastric juice, the scolex being protected 
by calcareous concretions ; the head, exhibiting active move- 
ments all the time, passes into the intestine, where it attaches 
itself, by means of its hooks and suckers, to the wall of the 
canal. Growth at once 'begins, as owing to its position it is 
richly nourished by its host, the head budding off asexually a 
chain of joints called the strobila. These joints are pushed 
farther and farther away from the head by the new joints, which 
are continually being formed. After some time the joints 
develop reproductive organs, which mature, the female organs 
giving rise to eggs, and the male ones to spermatozoa, which 
fertilise these eggs. When the eggs are ripe the mature joints 
drop off, and the life history of a new generation commences. 



Digitized 



by Google 



214 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

The life history of the Tape-worm is generally considered to form a good 
example of alternation of generations, the sexually mature proglottis giving 
rise to embryos which develop into scolices, the asexual animals from which 
the sexual proglottides are budded off. According to this view, the so- 
called adult animal, that is the animal which lives in the final host, is con- 
sidered to be a colony of independent individuals, the scolex and its 
daughter proglottides. These latter only retain their connection with the 
scolex and with each other, whilst they are developing their sexual organs, 
and when a proglottis severs this connection, it is, so to speak, the first 
indication of its approaching death. It can, however, generally live for 
some time independently, and even sometimes increases considerably in 
size after it has dropped off. A strong argument in favour of this view is 
the fact, that although it is comparatively easy to get rid of all the prog- 
lottides budded off from the scolex, by giving drugs to the final host, it is by 
no mean? easy to get rid of the scolex itself, which, after losing the prog- 
lottides, at once begins to bud off new ones, being apparently quite un- 
injured by the violent removal of the ones previously formed. In the 
Taenia echinococcus several heads or scolices are budded off from the 
proscolex or bladder-worm, each head being capable of developing into an 
adult Tape-worm. Thus it is not the scolex which buds off sexual animals, 
but the asexual proscolex which buds off scolices, each of which gives rise 
to sexual proglottides. 

The chief arguments against this view are— (i) that the segments are not 
really independent of each other as they have excretory canals (water 
vascular systems) and nervous systems in common ; (2) that it is only in the 
oldest segments that an independent existence can be carried on, and then 
only for a limited time, which in some forms is very short ; (3) that in the 
portion of the animal immediately following the head there is at first no 
trace of distinct segmentation ; (4) that the life history from the egg to 
the animal carrying sexually mature segments, is the history of the life of a 
single individual, there being pauses, as it were, in the history but no 
breaks, and it is impossible to speak of an alternation of generations 
occurring in the life of a single individual. For an alternation to occur it 
is necessary that there should be a sexual individual alternating with an 
asexual individual. 



To recapitulate — 

1. The six-hooked embryo gives rise to the proscolex or 
bladder-worm (cysticercus, hydatid). 



Digitized 



by Google 



TAPE-WORMS. 215 



2. The cysticercus develops a head which becomes evagin- 
ated, and is then called the scolex. 

3. The neck and bladder of the cysticercus are dissolved, 
and the scolex develops into an adult Tape-worm, which buds 
off a strobila of sexual proglottides, in which, when mature, 
eggs and spermatozoa are formed. These develop into embryos 
enclosed in their shells. 

Of these phases, the first is passed partly in the body of the 
final host, as it is in his intestine that the egg develops into an 
embryo, enclosed in a shell. The shell is dissolved in the 
alimentary canal of the Pig, who acts as the intermediate host, * 
and it is in his muscles that the second stage occurs ; whilst it 
is only after the animal has got into his final host, Man or 
another Pig, that the third phase of its life history is passed. 

The above life history is true in the main, not only of the 
Taenia solium, but also of the Bothriocephalus latus, of the 
Taenia mediocanellata, and of the Taenia echinococcus. 

The Bothriocephalus latus has no hooks and only two 
lateral suckers. Its final host is Man, its intermediate host 
being frequently the Pike. The embryo is ciliated, and swims 
freely. The cystic stage is absent, so that the scolex is really 
only a late stage of the embryo. 

The Taenia mediocanellata has four suckers but no hooks. 
Man forms the final host, whilst the Ox is the intermediate 
host, giving lodgment to the cysticercus. 

The Taenia echinococcus is a small Tape-worm, a quarter of 
an inch in length, with only four proglottides, and numerous 
though small hooks on its head. It occurs in the intestine of 
the Dog. Its bladder-worm (hydatid) is distinguished by the 
great thickness of the stratified cuticle, and by the fact that the 
bladder or hydatid cyst gives rise not to a single head but to a 
considerable number. 



Digitized 



by Google 



2l6 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



It usually occurs in the liver or lungs, but it may occur in 
any part of the bodies of domestic animals or of Man. 




Fig. 1x3.— Bothriocephalus latus (after Leuckart). 

When the embryo has reached the liver, it proceeds to 



Digitized 



by Google 



TAPE-WORMS. 



217 



develop into a hydatid or cysticercus, losing its hooks, 
developing its bladder, and becoming invested by a connective 
tissue sheath formed by its host, exactly like the Taenia solium. 
The sheath grows with the growth of the hydatid. Generally, 




Fig. 1x4.— a and b t Brood capsules ot Echinococcus with developing heads (after 
Leuckart and Wagener) ; c, heads cf Echinococcus still connected with the 
brood capsule, one is evaginated ; Vc, excretory canals (from Claus). 

instead of a single bud, a number of buds are formed by the 
inner wall of the bladder. Each of these buds in turn forms 
a cystic body, which, for a time, remains attached to the wall 
by a pedicle. After it has become detached, it is called a 
daughter cyst, while the original bladder is termed the mother 



Digitized 



by Google 



218 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 

cyst. Each daughter cyst again may develop one or more 
granddaughter cysts in its interior. The original bladder thus 
becomes filled with a number of smaller bladders of various 
sizes ; sometimes thousands of them are present. Sooner or 
later the little buds cease to form detached vesicles and 
develop into small membranous sacs, the pedicles of which are 
persistent ; these are called brood capsules, because they give 
origin to a varying number of scolices or heads, each of which 
has its row of hooklets and its four suckers, and is capable, 
under favourable conditions, of growing into an adult Taenia 
echinococcus. 

The hydatid cyst may grow to an enormous size, sometimes 
being as big as a child's head. These Echinococcus cysts 
occasionally remain sterile, when they are described as Acepha- 
locysts. 

Occasionally, though very rarely, a cyst is found which has given off 
numerous buds externally (Echinococcus multilocularis) ; these grow in all 
directions, and themselves give off new buds so that a mass of considerable 
size is produced, the original cyst appearing like a root, and the buds like 
so many branches. As these buds usually remain small, and are a good 
deal compressed by the tissues amongst which they force their way, the 
whole mass presents the appearance of a solid tumour, and it was at one 
time thought to be a peculiar species of cancer. 

Anatomy. — The Tape-worm, which has been most thoroughly 
worked at, and which occurs most frequently in Europe, taken 
as a whole, is the Taenia mediocanellata, or, as it has also been 
called, the Taenia saginata. It is doubtful whether this Tape- 
worm or the Taenia solium is more common in England. One 
would have expected, that the pork Tape-worm would have been 
the commoner, from the fact that under-done pork is more 
frequently eaten than under-done beef. 

The following description is that of Taenia mediocanellata, 



Digitized 



by Google 



TAPE-WORMS. 



219 



but the differences between it and Taenia solium are not great. 
An average specimen measures from fifteen to twenty feet in 




Fig. 115.— Taenia saginata (mediocanellata) (after Leuckart), natural size. 

length, and consists of fourteen hundred segments ; of these 
more than two hundred and fifty will be found within a distance 



Digitized 



by Google 



220 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

of two inches from the head. The segments are narrowest and 
shortest near the head ; they widen and lengthen gradually until 
near the middle of the chain they will be found to have a 
width of about three-fifths of an inch and a length of about a 
quarter of an inch. Towards the terminal segments the width 
decreases, being on an average about a quarter of an inch, but 
the length continues to increase, until the terminal segment has 
on the average a length of about four-fifths of an inch. The 
segments of this worm are also characterised by their firm 
appearance and by their thickness. 

The worm is sometimes called the unarmed Tape-worm, from 
the fact that it has no hooks on the head. The head is 
spheroidal, about one-seventeenth of an inch in diameter, and 
bears on its lateral surface four equidistant suckers by which 
the animal attaches itself to the mucous membrane of the in- 
testine of its host. It has a flattened crown with a pit-like 
hollow in the middle. The suckers only project slightly, and 
are surrounded by a pigmented border. 

The neck (so called from its naked-eye appearance) has no 
more right to its name, than has the scolex to the term head, 
for it is only a succession of imperfectly developed segments. 
It is generally about one-twenty-fifth of an inch long. The 
rings, which are at first very faintly marked and very narrow, 
become more and more distinct and gradually larger the 
farther they are removed from the head. The sexual organs 
become completely developed about the six-hundredth seg- 
ment, while the embryos are only formed about three hundred 
and fifty or four hundred segments farther on. The simplicity 
of the internal organisation corresponds with the simple appear- 
ance of the external structure of the majority of the segments, 
it being only in the generative organs and in the excretory 
apparatus that any degree of complexity occurs. 



Digitized 



by Google 



TAPE-WORMS. 



221 



Beneath the external cuticle there is a groundwork of small 
cells, in which glandular cells are scattered here and there. 
Beneath this groundwork there is a delicate outer layer of 
longitudinal muscular fibres. Within this, again, there is a 
meshwork of connective tissue, in which all the organs are 
imbedded. At the outer part of this meshwork there are 
more longitudinal fibres, as well as an inner layer of circular 
muscle. Chiefly at the sides of the body, but to a small 
extent also in other parts, there are muscle fibres stretching 




Fig. i 16.— Transverse section of joint of Taenia sapnata (mediocanellata) (from 

Leuckart). 



from one surface to the other. The changes in form which 
are seen to take place in the proglottis are due to these various 
layers of muscle, acting either independently or together. 
Thus the segment can shorten itself considerably, becoming 
at the same time broader and thicker ; on the other hand, it 
is also capable of considerable elongation, when it becomes 
much thinner. 

For a long time the existence of a nervous system was 
denied, but it has been proved to be present in the form of 
two lateral longitudinal cords, which run down externally to 



Digitized 



by Google 



222 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



the main trunks of the excretory system. These cords have 
no sheath and hence are not very easy to see. In the head 
they are somewhat swollen, and are connected together by a 
transverse commissure, the swellings and the commissure 




Fig. 117.— Longitudinal section of Taenia saginata (mediocanellata) (from 
Leuckart). 



being described as a cephalic ganglion. The nerve cords are 
lined with delicate cells on their dorsal and ventral surfaces. 
There are no distinct sense organs, but the skin, especially in 
the head and suckers, is supposed to possessi some sense of 
touch. In one Tape-worm (Taenia perfoliata) nerve branches 



Digitized 



by Google 



TAPE-WORMS. 223 



have been seen to pass from the cephalic ganglion to the 
suckers. 

The Alimentary Canal. — Nothing in the form of an alimen- 
tary canal is present. The animal has no need of a digestive 
system, as it takes in all nourishment through the walls of its 
body by osmosis, the substances being made ready for ab- 
sorption by its host. It is probable, however, that some 
change is effected in the food by the cells in the body-wall 
during its passage. 




Fig. 118.— Head of Taenia serrata with its excretory vessels (from Leuckart). 

The Blood Vascular System. — This is entirely wanting. 

The Excretory System (water vascular system). — This is 
well developed, and is composed of a system of much-ramified 
canals distributed throughout the whole of the Tape-worm. It 
consists primarily of two longitudinal canals, one running along 
each side of the body. These are connected in the head and 
in each segment by transverse trunks. The longitudinal trunks 
appear straight, or wavy, according to the state of contraction 
or elongation of the animal's body. In many species there are 
four longitudinal trunks, but in both Taenia mediocanellata 
and Taenia solium there are only two. The transverse con- 



Digitized 



by Google 



224 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

necting trunks always occur at the posterior border of the 
joint (see fig. 119). The fluid in the longitudinal trunks can 
only flow in one direction — from before backwards, — its 
passage in the opposite direction being prevented by a valvular 
arrangement in the vessels. 

Some of the fluid escapes when a segment drops off, as the vessels at the 
posterior end of the body are left open. At the same time, the sudden and 
complete emptying of the canals is apparently prevented by the curving 
forward of the short transverse trunk in this segment Moreover, the 
ruptured ducts draw together when the division occurs. As soon as a 
segment drops off, the transverse trunk of the last segment but one begins 
to take on the same arrangement, so as to be ready for the next rupture 
of the ducts. The longitudinal canals are really efferent vessels for a 
system of very fine ducts, which ramify through the whole meshwork and 
receive long tubes, which begin as closed ciliated funnels. These canals 
contain a clear watery fluid without granules. It has been suggested that 
the longitudinal canals are the representatives of the coelom or body-cavity, 
but this view has not yet been definitely proved. 

Generative Apparatus. — Each proglottis is hermaphrodite, 
containing its own male and female generative organs, which 
are completely independent of the generative organs in any 
other segment. In the segments, close to the head, no sexual 
organs can be discovered ; and, in fact, it is only in about the 
four-hundredth joint, that the first traces of germ-producing 
organs are visible. The anterior and middle portions of the 
segment are seen to be granular, the granules being distributed 
pretty uniformly over the whole surface of these regions. 
These granules eventually become the male generative organs. 
In the posterior part of the segment, two plate-like masses of 
granules may be distinguished. Between them lies a third 
mass of somewhat different form. These develop into the two 
ovaries and the yolk gland. About two hundred segments 
further on, the male generative organs are found fully developed ; 
the female ones reach maturity a little later. 



Digitized 



by Google 



TAPE-WORMS. 



225 



The male apparatus consists of a large number of pear- 
shaped vesicles, called the testes or testicular vesicles ; these 
are connected by their efferent ducts or vasa efferentia with a 
common duct, the vas deferens. The coiled end of this duct 
lies in a muscular pouch, called the cirrus pouch or sheath, 
the duct itself being known as the cirrus or penis. The penis 




Fig. 119.— Proglottis of Taenia mediocanellata, with male and female organs (after 
Sommer). Ov, ovary ; Ds, yolk gland (vitellarium) ; Sd, shell gland ; Ut, 
uterus ; T, testes ; Vd t vas deferens ; Cb 9 pouch of the cirrus ; K, generative 
cloaca ; Va, vagina. 

can be everted, and it is provided with spines. When everted 
it protrudes, and then acts as a copulatory organ, entering the 
vagina, generally of its own segment. 

The female apparatus is very complicated. It consists of 
a vagina, a shell gland, a yolk gland, a two-lobed ovary, a 
receptaculum seminis, and a uterus. 

The vagina, like the cirrus and vas deferens, is lined by 
cuticle. It is a very fine tube, far too small to transmit the eggs 

*5 



Digitized 



by Google 



226 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

which, as before stated, are liberated by the bursting or dis- 
solving away of the walls of the proglottis. At its inner end the 
vagina loses its cuticular covering, and becomes dilated to 
form a small swelling, to which the name receptaculum seminis 
has been given. Beyond this swelling, it is a rather dilated, 
thin-walled tube, without any cuticular covering, and this short, 
thin-walled portion, called by Leuckart the fertilising canal, 
opens into the shell gland (Mehlis' body), which consists of 
closely compressed nucleated glandular cells, provided with 
thin ducts opening into the small internal cavity of the organ. 
The radiate appearance of this organ is due to the regular 
disposition of the cells and ducts. It is in this shell gland, 
that the ovarian eggs acquire their outer envelope of yolk and 
shell, the latter being probably the secretion of the glandular 
cells. The shell gland has opening into it by a common 
aperture, the fertilising canal and the common duct from the 
two ovaries. It also communicates with the duct of the uterus 
and that of the yolk or albumen gland. This organ, which 
consists of a system of branched blind tubules opening into 
efferent ducts, lies posterior to the shell gland, close to the 
posterior limit of the segment. The cells lining the tubules 
have well developed nuclei and nucleoli. The ovaries really 
together form one organ, with two wing-like expansions, the 
one nearer the vagina being the smaller of the two. In its 
structure it resembles the yolk gland, except that its cells 
(primitive ova) have a sharper contour, and in addition are 
provided with a clear protoplasmic envelope ; the primitive egg 
has also a large nucleus (germinal vesicle), and the nucleolus 
(germinal spot) is well marked. 

The uterus, at this stage of development, consists of a 
straight tube, which runs almost up to the anterior end of the 
segment, and opens by a fine duct into the shell gland. 



Digitized 



by Google 



TAPE-WORMS. 



227 



As before mentioned the vas deferens and the vagina both 
open into a common pouch or genital cloaca, which opens to 
the exterior by the genital pore. As soon as the testes have 
reached maturity, copulation takes place, and the spermatozoa 
from the testes are passed down through the vas deferens into 
the vagina, and so to the receptaculum seminis, where they 
remain until the female generative organs have reached 
maturity. As soon as the ova become fully developed, they 




Fig. 120.— Ripe proglottides ready to separate— a, of Taenia solium ; 6, of Taenia 
mediocanellata. We, water-vascular (excretory) canal (from Claus). 



are fertilised by the spermatozoa, and then they pass into the 
uterus. As the uterus becomes distended by the rapidly 
growing eggs, it assumes its characteristic branched shape, and 
at the same time the testes, the ovaries, and all the rest of the 
generative apparatus more or less completely atrophy. 

In the Bothriocephalus latus the genital pore lies on the 
ventral surface of the segment. In the Taenia solium it is 
placed alternately on the right and on the left side, so that it is 
impossible for neighbouring segments to fertilise each other. 



Digitized 



by Google 



228 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

It is not improbable that sometimes a segment fertilises the 
next but one to it. 

Historical. — Some forms of Cestodes have been known from time im- 
memorial. Aristotle speaks of bladder-worms in the tongue, and he and 
Hippocrates separated the Cestodes and other Flat worms from the Round 
worms. In the middle ages, the Tape-worm was known as Lumbricus 
latus, and all the varieties were considered to belong to the same species, 
until Felix Plater separated the Bothriocephalus latus from the other 
human Tape-worms. This Bothriocephalus was described by Bremser 
in 1819. Siebold in 1838 discovered the six-hooked embryo of the Taenia 
solium, and shortly after Steenstrup published his work on the alternation 
of generations. This at once suggested the explanation of the apparently 
contradictory statements made by various observers of the forms and life 
history of the Tape- worms. Kuchenmeister in 185 1 fed a dog with bladder- 
worms taken from a Rabbit, and a Cat with specimens from a Mouse, and 
he found that after an interval Tape-worms were present in the intestines of 
both these animals. Since 1851 numerous experimental observations have 
been made by Van Beneden, Leuckart, Mosler, St. Cyr, Cobbold, and many 
other observers, the results of which have furnished a very extensive list of 
hosts with their respective parasites. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XXII. 

NEMATODA. 

THE Nematoda are unsegmented worms, with elongated 
cylindrical bodies, which taper at each end. With very 
few exceptions the sexes are separate, the male being generally 
smaller than the female. There is always a well-developed 
cuticle. A nerve ring surrounds the oesophagus, and from it 
there pass twelve nerves, six forwards and six backwards. The 
alimentary canal is usually well developed, and consists of a 
mouth, a muscular oesophagus, an intestine, a rectum, and an 
anus. There are two canals, one on each side of the body, 
between the dorsal and ventral groups of muscles. These may 
be excretory in function. They join together anteriorly, and 
open by a common anterior and ventral pore. The male 
usually has special copulatory spicules. The reproductive 
organs are long tubes, which open about the middle of the body 
in the females, and in the posterior region in the males by an 
aperture common to them and the rectum. The spermatozoa 
are small cells without tails. The female sexual tube is divided 
into the vagina, the uterus, the oviduct, and the ovary. The 
male sexual tube is divided into the terminal testis, the vas 
deferens, the vesicula seminalis, and the ductus ejaculatorius. 
The muscular system is well developed, and consists of four 
distinct groups of muscles, two dorsal and two ventral, lying 
immediately beneath .the epidermis. They are made up of 



Digitized 



by Google 



230 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

band-like or fusiform cells, each of which consists of an 
internal granular portion and an external fibrillated layer. 

The body-cavity is usually well developed, forming a space 
between the alimentary canal and the body-wall. Cilia are 
never present. There is no trace of a blood vascular system. 
In the free-swimming forms eyes are generally present, and 
also in these forms papillae and tactile hairs occur in the 
neighbourhood of the mouth. 

A few Nematodes, belonging to the family of the Anguillulidae, 
are free living, spending their lives in damp earth or in water. 
Some are parasitic in or upon plants. Most, however, are 
parasitic upon animals. 

In one form, that of the hermaphrodite* nematode Rhabdonema nigrove- 
nosum, the offspring of the parasitic worm attain sexual maturity in damp 
earth. They are then known as Rhabditis forms, and are peculiar in that 
the sexes are separate. Their offspring, however, grow up into herma- 
phrodite forms again. 

The Gordiidae, to which the Horse-hair Worm belongs, have 
in the adult condition no mouth, and a degenerate alimentary 
canal, although they swim freely in fresh water. Their larvae 
are parasitic upon water insects, or upon animals which eat 
water insects, and have a well-developed mouth. 

Development. — The development of the Nematodes is usually 
simple; the egg after fertilisation develops into an embryo, 
usually while still within the egg shell. As a rule the eggs are 
laid before development has commenced, but in some forms 
(Filaria, Trichina) the animal is well developed before birth ; 
these forms are therefore viviparous. 

The parasitic Nematoda usually inhabit the digestive tract, 
but in Vertebrates they also occur in the lungs, the kidneys, 
and urinary bladder, or in an encysted form in the muscles 
and other organs. 



Digitized 



by Google 



NEMATODA. 



231 



In some forms the larvae develop directly into the adult. 
In many forms, however, they become encysted in the tissues 
of one animal, and develop into sexually mature adults in 
the digestive tract of another. Several species of Nematodes 
are human parasites ; some of these are harmless, others are 
very dangerous. 

The following forms frequently occur in Man : Ascaris lum- 
bricoides, Oxyuris vermicularis, Trichocephalus dispar, Anchy- 
lostomum duodenalis, Trichina spiralis, Filaria medinensis, and 
Filaria sanguinis hominis. 




Fig. 121.— Ascaris lumbricoides (after Leuckart). a, Posterior end of a male with 
the two spicula (Sp) ; b % anterior end from the dorsal side, with the dorsal lip 
furnished with two papillae ; c, the same from the ventral side with the two 
lateral lips and the excretory pore (P) ; d, egg with its external membrane. 

The Ascaris lumbricoides (the common round worm or maw- 
worm) is a cylindrical worm with pointed ends. It inhabits 
the intestine. The female varies from eight-and-a-half to six- 
teen inches in length. The male is considerably smaller ; its 
tail, which is bent to form a hook, bears two chitinous spicula. 
The mouth is surrounded by three muscular lips, armed with 
fine teeth. The female genital aperture is in front of the 
middle of the body on the ventral surface. The male genital 
aperture coincides with the anus. The female produces 
enormous numbers of eggs, which when mature are passed out 
with the faeces of the host ; they are provided with a double 



Digitized 



by Google 



232 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



shell surrounded by an albuminous coating, and are very 

a C 
b 






Fig. 122. — Oxyuris vermicularis (after Leuckart). a, female ; O, mouth ; A, anus ; 
V t genital opening, b, male with curved posterior end. c, the latter enlarged ; 
Sp, spiculum. d, egg with enclosed embryo. 

resistant both to cold and drying. The further history of the 



Digitized 



by Google 




NEMATODA. 233 



animal is not known, but it is not improbable, that it has to 
pass through an intermediate host, before it again visits man, 
and develops into a sexually mature adult. The Ascaris lum- 
bricoides is comparatively common in England, but is met with 
far more frequently on the Continent. It often occurs singly, 
but sometimes a very large number are present ; they are usually 
eventually voided with the faeces, but are occasionally vomited 
up. Unless present in very large numbers, this parasite does 
no harm to his host, being rather a messmate than a parasite. 

Oxyuris vermicularis, the thread-worm so frequently present 
in the lower part of the intestine in children, is a small round 
worm. The female is about two-fifths of an inch long, whilst 
the male only measures about one-fifth of an inch. The female 
has a pointed tail, whilst that of the male is blunt, and is 
furnished with a single spicule. The egg is flat on one side 
and round on the other, and is provided with a shell covered 
by an albuminous coating. It must be swallowed by an 
animal before it can develop into a sexually mature adult 
worm. These parasites are frequently present in enormous 
numbers, being passed in considerable quantities with the 
faeces. They do no harm to their hosts, except by the violent 
irritation they induce. The eggs are not destroyed by being 
dried. 

The Trichocephalus dispar, or whip-worm, is a small worm 
inhabiting the lower part of the small intestine. Both male 
and female measure about two inches in length. The anterior 
part of the body is thread like ; the posterior part, which con- 
tains the genital organs, being much thicker. In the female 
this posterior part is straight and cylindrical; in the male it 
is coiled into a spiral, and the tail is provided with a spicule. 
The egg has a thick brown shell and a projection at each pole. 
The larval stage is passed in water, and lasts for four or five 



Digitized 



by Google 



234 



ELEMESTARY BIOLOGY. 



months. This parasite is not very often seen in England, but 
it is said to be very common in France. It is quite harmless. 

Anchyloftamum dnodenalii, called also Dochmius duodenalis 
and Strongylus duodenalis, is a small worm inhabiting the 
upper part of the intestine. The female is cylindrical in form, 
a quarter to half an inch in length. The male is from one to 
two-fifths of an inch long. The head end is bent towards the 





Fig. 123.— Trichoccphalus dispar (after Leuckart). a, Egg ; b, female ; c t male with 
anterior part of body buried in mucous membrane ; Sp, spiculura. 

dorsal surface, and has a strongly armed mouth provided with a 
horny oral capsule, .armed with four curved and two straight 
teeth. The male genital opening is placed at the posterior 
end of the body, at the bottom of an umbrella or bell-shaped 
bursa ; the tail is provided with two thin spicules. The female 
becomes gradually thinner towards the posterior end, and 
terminates in a spine ; the genital aperture lies behind the 
middle of the body. The eggs are oval. The first stages of 



Digitized 



by Google 



NEMATODA. 



235 



development take place in the human intestine ; the eggs then 
pass out with the faeces, and pass their next stage in water ; if 
they again find their way into the intestine of man, they rapidly 
develop, producing the mature worm, which feeds upon the 




Fig. 124.— Dochmius duodenalis (after Leuckart). a, Male ; 0, mouth ; B, bursa : 
, female ; O, mouth ; A, anus ; V, vulva. 

blood of its host. This it obtains by gnawing a wound in 
the mucous membrane of the bowel. After the death of the 
host, the wound presents the appearance of a small swelling 
filled with blood, in the centre of which there is a small 
aperture which contained the head of the worm. Occasionally 
the swellings are larger^ and contain coiled-up worms inside 



Digitized 



by Google 



236 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

them. If present only in small numbers, no appreciable harm 
results, but if there are large numbers of the parasites in the 
bowel, serious and even fatal haemorrhage may be produced. 
The disease known as Egyptian chlorosis is produced by this 
animal. 

The Trichina spiralis, or flesh-worm of pork, occurs in 
two forms, the immature form being found in muscles, etc., and 
the mature in the intestine. It is very minute, only about one- 
ninth of an inch in length, and is very thin. The posterior 
portion in both sexes is straight ; the male is furnished at its 
tail with two papillae which are turned towards the ventral 
surface, and which include between them four wart-like 
nodules ; it has no spicule. During copulation the rectum is 
everted and protruded, so as to bring the aperture of the sexual 
tube outside the animal's body. The female genital pore 
occurs at the junction of the anterior quarter with the posterior 
three-quarters of the body. The intestine is surrounded by 
numerous cellular masses. The eggs develop into embryos in 
the uterus, and are born in the free state, the animal being 
viviparous. When set free they at once pass through the walls 
of the intestine of their host, making their way either directly 
into the peritoneal cavity or into the sub-peritoneal connective 
tissues. They may also pass into the blood and lymph streams, 
and thus be conveyed to every organ of the body. Those 
that reach the muscles at once penetrate into the muscular 
fibres, reducing the muscular tissue to mere organic ditbris\ 
they take about fourteen days to develop into mature larvae. 
Each one then becomes surrounded with a cyst, formed partly 
of the sarcolemma of the muscle, partly of a chitinous substance 
secreted by the animal, and partly of connective tissue which 
is formed owing to the irritation set up by the presence of the 
parasite. After a time calcareous salts are deposited in the 



Digitized 



by Google 




Fig. 125.— Trichina spiralis (from Claus). a, Mature female Trichina from the 
alimentary canal ; G, genital opening ; E t embryos ; Ov, ovary. b % male ; 
T, testis, c, embryo, a, embryo in a muscle fibre. e t the same developed into 
a coiled Muscle Trichina, and encysted. 



Digitized 



by Google 



238 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 

cyst wall, so that the muscle appears to be dotted with in- 
numerable minute white specks. If the Trichina dies, the 
contents of the cyst become calcified. The animal can, how- 
ever, live for a very long time in this quiescent condition. 

If uncooked pork, containing living encysted Trichinae, be 
eaten by a human or other host, the cyst becomes dissolved 
in the stomach, after which the larvae rapidly grow, reaching 
sexual maturity in about two and a half days. They then pair, 
and after the seventh day living embryos are born in large 
numbers, as many as a thousand being produced by a single 
female. The embryos then make their way through the walls 
of the intestine and into the muscles as above described. 

Trichinae have been met with in Men, Pigs, Rats, Cats, 
Mice, Foxes, Badgers, Hedgehogs, and a few other vertebrates. 
Man is usually attacked with trichinosis as the result of eating 
uncooked trichinous pork. If a large number of encysted 
Trichinae have been swallowed, a fatal result usually ensues. 
The muscular Trichinae are found most abundantly in the 
diaphragm, intercostal, cervical and laryngeal muscles, the 
muscles of the limbs being least affected. 

The Filaria (Dracunculus) medinensis, or Guinea-worm, is 
a long thread-like worm from twenty-four to forty inches in 
length. The anterior end is rounded ; the posterior terminates 
in a pointed tail curved over ventrally. The female only is 
known ; it lives encysted under the skin of the leg or arm. 
The gravid uterus occupies the greater part of the body, and 
contains enormous numbers of ova and embryos ; the latter 
have no envelope, their tails are pointed, and they possess a 
strong cuticle. The larval stage is passed in certain small 
Crustaceans (Cyclops) which live in drinking water. They are 
very common in Africa and Asia. 

The Filaria sanguinis hominis inhabits the lymphatics 



Digitized 



by Google 



NEMATODA. 



239 



of Man, especially occurring in those of the scrotum and 
lower limbs. They cause obstructions in the lymphatic 
vessels, and give rise to the disease known as Elephan- 




Fig. 126.— Filaria medinensis (after Bastian and Leuckart). a, anterior end seen 
from the oral surface ; O, mouth ; P, papilla, b, pregnant female, c, embryos 
strongly magnified. 

tiasis. The lymphatics containing them may rupture, with 
the result that lymph and parasites may escape into the urine 
or into the abdominal cavity. 



Digitized 



by Google 



240 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

The adult female is about three inches long ; it has a club- 
shaped head. The posterior part of the body contains a bifid 
uterus filled with ova and embryos, the latter being born aHve. 
Within the uterus the embryo is provided with a membranous 
covering derived from the original envelope of the egg. As 
it grows it stretches this membrane, which, after the animal's 
birth, always remains attached to and investing it, projecting 
generally in the form of a lash from one end of the body. 
The intermediate host is the Mosquito, this animal taking in 
the embryos with the blood it sucks ; the embryos pass a short 
time in the body of the Mosquito, and are then discharged into 
water. Here a further development takes place. If they then 
get into the body of their final host, they make their way into 
the lymphatics, and develop into sexually mature Filariae. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XXIII. 
THE LEECH (HIRUDO MEDICINALIS). 

THE Leech belongs to the large group of animals included 
under the name Worms. Worms may be said to begin 
the series of ccelomate animals, being the lowest which possess 
a ccelom or body-cavity. The Leech belongs to the same large 
class as the common Earth-worm, although they differ from 
each other in many respects. Like the Earth-worm, the Leech 
is made up of a series of segments, each of which is, to a 
certain extent, a repetition of the one in front of it. Thus, in 
each segment is found a pair of nerve-ganglia upon the nerve- 
cords and a pair of excretory organs (nephridia). It will, 
however, be noticed that the external rings or annuli are very 
much more numerous than the number of segments ; five annuli 
correspond to each segment or somite, there being about one 
hundred annuli, but only twenty-six segments in the body. 
The Medicinal leech is an elongated flattened worm. It varies 
from two to six inches in length, according as to whether it is 
stretched out or contracted. It lives in freshwater pools, in 
marshes, in sluggish streams, and either swims freely by vertical 
undulations of the body, or moves over the ground by attaching 
itself alternately by its anterior and posterior suckers. It 
lives on the blood of higher animals, such as Fishes and Frogs, 
to which it attaches itself for the purpose of sucking their 
blood. Its blood-sucking propensities are made use of in 

2 < x 16 



Digitized 



by Google 



242 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



medicine for the purpose of abstracting blood from the 
human subject. 

In shape, the Leech is either flattened or cylindrical, according 
as to whether it is contracted or not ; it is widest just behind 
the middle, and, when flattened, is oval in transverse section, 
being more convex dorsally than ventrally. The skin of the 
segments, 9 to n, is covered with a slimy secretion. This 
marks the position of the clitellum or saddle, the secretion of 
which makes the cocoon for the eggs. 

The dorsal surface is darker than the ventral, and is usually 
marked on either side by three pale longitudinal stripes, the 
two outer of which, on each side, are marked by dark dots. 
The dots which occur on every fifth annulus are larger and 
darker than the rest, especially in the middle stripe on either 
side. That in which the dots are darker is the hindmost 
annulus of each segment of the body. The most anterior 
of the five annuli, which make up a segment or somite, has on 
it a transverse ring of small white dots. The ventral surface 
presents an irregularly mottled appearance. 

There are two suckers, an anterior and a posterior one. 
The anterior one is placed on the ventral surface of the anterior 
end of the body, and is depressed in the centre to form the 
entrance to the month. The anterior edge of the sucker is 
frequently folded down over the mouth like a kind of lip. The 
posterior sucker is circular, larger than the anterior one, and 
is placed at the posterior end of the body, from which it is 
separated by a slight constriction. The muscle of the body- 
wall of the Leech is arranged as an outer circular layer, a middle 
oblique layer, and an inner longitudinal layer. There are, in 
addition, bundles of fibres crossing the body from the dorsal 
to the ventral surface (see fig. 128, p. 246). 

Alimentary canal.— The month lying at the bottom of the 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE LEECH (HIRUDO MEDICINALIS). 243 




depression in the anterior sucker is pro- 
vided with three jaws, each of which 
consists of a muscular cushion covered on 
the surface by a horny cuticle. This 
cuticle is thickened at the free edge of 
the jaw, and is notched to form a large 
number of very fine teeth. When the 
animal has firmly fixed itself to its prey 
by its posterior sucker, it brings the 
anterior sucker down, and after taking a 
firm hold with it, it saws the skin with its 
jaws until a bleeding wound is produced. 
As all the jaws work, the wound is tri- 
radiate, each cut corresponding with the 
position of the jaw producing it. The 
blood is then sucked in through the mouth 
and through the very small aperture which 
leads from the mouth into the pharynx. 
The sucking action is produced by the 
pharynx whose walls are furnished with 
powerful muscles, the contractions of 
which serve to diminish the size of the 
pharyngeal cavity; the pharyngeal walls 
are further attached by the muscles to the 
body-walls, the contraction of these latter 
(radial muscles) serving to dilate the cavity. 
By the alternate contraction of the mus- 
cular walls and the radial muscles, blood 



15 



16 



17 



18 



Fig. 127.— Hirudo medicinalis seen from the ventral 
surface (from Marshall after Bourne). The uum. 
bers x to 23 indicate the somites ; the numbers / 
to V the five annuli of the twelfth somite ; A, anterior sucker ; B, posterior 
sucker ; G, male aperture ; H, female aperture ; N t nephridial apertures. 




Digitized 



by Google 



244 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

is sucked in and forced on from the pharynx through a short 
narrow tube, the oesophagus, into the next portion of the ali- 
mentary canal, the crop. Upon the inner wall of the pharynx 
lying amongst the muscles there are a number of large pear- 
shaped cells, which secrete a fluid containing a ferment This 
ferment prevents the blood which is sucked in from clotting. 
These gland cells, by means of fine ducts opening close to the 
jaws, pour their secretions upon the blood as it is taken in. 

The crop, into which the oesophagus opens, is the most 
conspicuous part of the alimentary canal. It extends from the 
fourth to the fourteenth segment, and consists of a straight, thin- 
walled tube into which eleven pouches, whose walls are folded 
internally, open upon either side. These pouches are small in 
the anterior region, but they gradually enlarge, until in the 
posterior region they are of considerable size. The hindmost 
pair extend backwards for some distance on either side of the 
intestine. 

Just behind the crop, and communicating with it, there is 
a small bilobed sac, which opens posteriorly into a narrow 
straight tube. The bilobed sac is the stomach, and the 
straight tube the intestine. The intestine is shut off from the 
stomach by a ring of muscle forming a sphincter. Considering 
the large size of the crop and the large quantity of blood that the 
animal can take in at one time, it is at first sight surprising that 
the stomach should be so small, for it is probable that digestion 
only takes place in the stomach, and that all the digested 
material is absorbed through its walls. But when we consider 
that the Leech takes several months to digest a single meal, 
it is evident that a small digesting and absorbing surface is 
sufficient for its needs. 

If a Leech is wanted to abstract more than one crop full of blood, it is 
necessary to squeeze it from behind forwards so as to empty the pouches 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE LEECH (HIRUDO MEDICINALIS). 245 

into the crop; it will then vomit its sanguinary meal, and can, after an 
interval for rest, be again made to feed. 

The intestine is a straight narrow tube, which runs from the 
stomach to an opening, the anus, which is a small aperture 
occurring on the dorsal surface of the animal just in front of the 
posterior sucker. In transverse sections of the Leech the 
alimentary canal can be seen to be made up of an outer 
connective-tissue layer containing a few muscular fibres, and an 
inner layer one cell thick, composed of short columnar cells* 

The Benal Excretory system. — The organs, which correspond 
to kidneys in the higher forms and whose function is to excrete 
nitrogenous waste material, are the nephridia or segmental 
organs. Each segment from the second to the eighteenth con- 
tains a pair of nephridia, which lie at the sides of, and below the 
alimentary canal, and open to the exterior by minute apertures, 
a pair of which occur in the hindmost annulus of each segment 
on the ventral surface of the animal. Most of the nephridia 
commence as cauliflower-like masses, composed of spongy 
ciliated cells ; these masses probably correspond to the ciliated 
funnels possessed by the nephridia of Worms that have a well- 
developed body-cavity. The mass of cells lies in a small sinus, 
the perinephrostomial sinus, and is continued into a rod, consist- 
ing also of a spongy mass of cells traversed in an irregular 
manner by very small ducts. In the segments which contain 
testes, this part of the nephridium lies in close relationship with 
the testis, and hence is called the testis lobe. The testis lobe 
is continuous with the main lobe of the nephridium, which 
consists of large granular cells and contains numerous fine- 
branched ducts. The main lobe is continuous with the apical 
lobe, which consists of cells the interiors of which have been 
hollowed out to form larger ducts; this lobe terminates the 
organ. A fine duct, consisting of cylindrical cells placed end 



Digitized 



by Google 




Fig. xa8.— Hirudo medicinalis (from Marshall and Hurst). Diagrammatic trans- 
verse section through middle of body. A, crop ; AL, apical lobe of nephridium ; 
AM, anterior limb of main lobe of nephridium ; B, right and Cleft diverticula 
of crop j CU, cuticle; Z>, epidermis: DS, dorsal sinus; E t layer of circular 
and oblique muscles ; F, longitudinal muscle layer ; G, cauliflower head of 
nephridium ; /, vesicle of nephridium ; K, external aperture of nephridium ; 
Lv t lateral vessel; N. nerve cord ; O, testis with developing spermatozoa ; 
P t vas deferens : PM t posterior limb of main lobe of nephridium ; PS, 
perinephrostomial sinus ; R, section of nephridium ; S. intracellular ductules 
of nephridium ; TL. testis lobe of nephridium; VS t ventral sinus; X, 
botryoidal tissue ; Y, dorso-ventral muscles. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE LEECH (HTRUDO MEDICINALTS). 247 

to end and hollowed out to form a tube, commences at the 
end of the apical lobe, and passes in a somewhat complicated 
manner through the organ, finally leaving it just at the junction 
of the main lobe with the testis lobe. It then runs as a short 
narrow tube called the vesicle duct to the vesicle, which is a 
dilated sac with muscular walls, and from which there runs a 
short tube which opens to the exterior. A connective-tissue 
sheath containing pigment invests the whole nephridium, and 
the organ is abundantly supplied with blood by branches from 
the lateral vessel. 

The nephridia in segments two to seven, in which there are 
no testes, have very small testis lobes and no cauliflower-like 
ends. 

The Vascular system.— This consists of the following parts : — 

1. Two lateral longitudinal blood vessels, with well- 
developed muscular walls, which give off a large number of 
branches to the skin, to the alimentary canal, and to the 
excretory and reproductive organs. 

2. Two blood sinuses — the dorsal, which runs along the 
dorsal surface of the whole length of the alimentary canal ; and 
the ventral, which runs beneath the alimentary canal. The 
walls of these sinuses are thin, and possess no muscle. Within 
the ventral sinus lies the nerve-cord. 

The lateral vessels and the dorsal and ventral sinuses 
communicate with each other freely through capillary systems 
in the skin and in the various organs. The ventral sinus is in 
direct communication with the perinephrostomial sinuses. The 
lateral vessels communicate with each other by well-developed 
transverse vessels which pass across the body beneath the 
ventral sinuses. The dorsal and ventral sinuses communicate 
with each other by numerous fine vessels which pass posteriorly 
between the intestine and the crop. 



Digitized 



by Google 



248 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 




In addition to the capil- 
laries in the skin and in 
the different organs there is 
a network of irregular chan- 
nels, the botryoidal tissue, 
which occurs just below 
the longitudinal muscular 
layer of the animal, and is 
especially well developed 
around the crop. 

The sinuses are really remains 
of the body-cavity, which, owing 
to the large development of 
connective and other tissue in 
the animal, is exceedingly re- 
duced in size. 

The blood is a red fluid 
in which float colourless 
amoeboid corpuscles. 



Fig. 129.— Hirudo medicinalis. Dia- 
grammatic view of renal, ner- 
vous and reproductive systems 
after removal of alimentary 
canal (from Marshall after 
Bourne). The somites are num- 
bered 1 to 23, and their bound- 
aries indicated by dotted lines. 
CG,supra-oesophageal ganglion ; 
EP, left epididymis ; Gx, the 
first of the twenty-three post 
oral ganglia ; GL t glandular 
enlargement of the oviducts; 
L t lateral vessel ; LA, latero- 
ventral branch of lateral vessel; 
LD, latero-dorsal branch ; LL t 
latero-lateral branch; Nx, the 
- .— — first of the seventeen nephridia 

of the left side ; O, nerve collar; OV, ovisac containing the left ovary; PE, 
penis ; 74, the third testis of the left side ; VD, vas deferens. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE LEECH (HIRUDO MEDTCINALIS). 249 



6K 



Reproductive organs. — Both male and female organs occur 
in the same animal — that is, the Leech is 
hermaphrodite; but the egg cells are never 
fertilised by spermatozoa from the same 
animal, but always from another. 

The male organs consist of nine pairs of 
testes lying in segments eight to sixteen. 
They are spherical sacs placed at the sides 
of the ventral sinus, towards the anterior 
portion of their respective segments. If the 
contents of a testis be examined with the 
microscope, it will be seen that they consist 
of spermatozoa in various stages of develop- 
ment. There are two thick-walled canals, the 
right and left vasa deferentia, with which 
each testis is connected by a short duct, llf^^BT^ 

the vas efferens. Each vas deferens runs 
longitudinally along the ventral body-wall, 
ending posteriorly blindly in the sixteenth 
segment, and anteriorly in the sixth seg- 
ment in a coiled tubular body, the epi- 
didymis, which secretes a viscid fluid for 
the purpose of gluing the spermatozoa to- 
gether into packets, called spermatophores. 
Each epididymis leads by a short duct on 
its inner side to the base of the penis, 
which is a pear-shaped tubular body, also 
lying in the sixth segment. The penis can 
be protruded some distance out of the male 



Fig. 130.— Longitudinal section through the Medicinal 

leech (after Leuckart). £>, intestinal canal ; G, cerebral ganglion ; Gk, gang- 
lionic chain ; Ex, excretory canals or segmental organs (nephridia). 



Digitized 



by Google 



250 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

genital aperture which lies in the anterior part of this 
segment. 

The female organs do not present the same segmental re- 
petition as the testes, the whole apparatus being contained in 
the seventh segment. They consist of — 

i. Two minute ovaries, enclosed in the ovisacs, which lie 
close to the middle line on the ventral surface. 

2. Two oviducts, narrow tubes, which lead from their re- 
spective ovisacs, and unite with each other to form a single 
much convoluted duct with glandular walls. 

3. The vagina, connected by this single united duct with 
the oviducts, and opening to the exterior at the female genital 
pore in the anterior part of the seventh segment. It is a thick- 
walled, muscular tube. 

The favourite breeding-time of the Leech is in spring. Two 
Leeches unite head to tail so that the penis of each enters the 
vagina of the other. 

The Nervous system consists of two ganglia (supra-oesopha- 
geal) lying close to each other on the dorsal wall of the 
anterior end of the pharynx. From these, two nerve-cords 
run round the pharynx (nerve-collar) and down the whole 
length of the animal. They are so close together, that they 
appear to form only one cord, and each pair of ganglia appears 
to unite to form a single ganglion. The first pair of ganglia 
(the sub-oesophageal) are the largest, and give off five pairs of 
nerves ; the next twenty-one pairs are small and give off two 
pairs of nerves each, whilst the last or twenty-third pair are 
also large and supply the posterior sucker. The jaws, eyes, 
and surrounding parts are supplied by branches from the supra- 
cesophageal ganglia. From the beginning of the ventral chain 
special nerves are given off to the alimentary canal to form a 
visceral nervous system. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE LEECH {HIRUDO MEDICINALIS\ 251 

Sense organs. — In addition to the dots already mentioned, 
which are supposed to have some sensory function, there 
are on the first eight rings ten eye spots. These consist of 
cup-shaped depressions in the epidermis, the base of each cup 
being surrounded by connective tissue containing black pigment. 
The central cells of the cup are in direct connection with 
nerve fibrils, and are surrounded by large clear cells, which 
may possibly have some function in condensing the rays of 
light upon the sensory cells. 

In a microscopical section of the skin of the Leech, the 
epidermis can be seen to consist of a single layer of columnar 
cells, on the outer surface of which is a structureless cuticle, 
and amongst which numerous unicellular gland cells occur. 
Below this is the dermis, which consists of a modified con- 
nective tissue, containing numerous pigmented fibres, some 
muscle fibres irregularly arranged, and an abundant plexus of 
blood vessels. Someof these blood vessels penetrate between 
the inner ends of the epidermal cells. By this means the blood 
is brought into close relationship with the oxygen dissolved 
in the water. Thus the aeration of the blood is provided 
for, and the necessity for special organs of respiration is 
avoided. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XXIV. 
THE DOG-FISH (SCYLLIUM CANICULA). 

THE Dog-fish may be taken as a convenient type to illus- 
trate some of the more important characters of the 
lower vertebrates. It is bilaterally symmetrical. It is pro- 
vided with four longitudinal fins (two dorsal, a caudal, and a 
ventral), and also an anterior and a posterior pair of lateral 
fins; these represent the anterior and posterior limbs of the 
higher animals. 

It has the following apertures : a mouth, a cloacal aperture, 
paired nostrils, spiracles, and, along the sides of the neck, 
five pairs of gill clefts. At the sides of the cloaca, a pair of 
pores occur, which in the adult open into the body-cavity. 

The skeleton is entirely cartilaginous, and consists of a skull ; 
a well-developed vertebral column ; short ribs in the anterior 
part of the body ; a visceral skeleton encircling the anterior 
part of the alimentary canal, and bearing gill rays ; and anterior 
and posterior pelvic girdles, which are only slightly developed, 
and articulating with which are the lateral fins. The trans- 
versely elongated mouth leads into a wide pharynx, from which 
a short oesophagus leads into the U-shaped stomach. From the 
stomach a very short small intestine leads into a comparatively 
short large intestine, provided with a spiral valve. At its 
hinder end it narrows to form the rectum, which opens into 
the cloaca. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE DOG-FISH (SCYLLIUM CANICULA). 253 

The liver is a large bilobed organ, from which a duct passes 
to open into the small intestine. 

The pancreas is a small organ lying between the stomach 
and the intestine, with a duct opening into the latter. 

The spleen is a large brownish-red body attached to the 
stomach. 

The heart is branchial, lying in a pericardial cavity just 
below the pharynx. It consists of a sinus venosus, an auricle, 
a ventricle, and a truncus arteriosus. From the latter the 
efferent gill vessels pass ; these, after breaking up in the gills, 
re-collect to form the dorsal aorta, which therefore contains 
aerated blood, which, after passing through the body, is re- 
turned to the heart by venous sinuses — namely, the anterior 
cardinal sinuses, the inferior jugular sinuses, the posterior 
cardinal sinuses, and the hepatic sinuses. The posterior car- 
dinal, anterior cardinal, and inferior jugular sinuses pour their 
blood into a small pouch on either side, the Cuvierian sinus ; 
from the Cuvierian sinuses it passes into the sinus venosus. 
The blood from the stomach and intestines passes through the 
portal vein to the liver ; from this organ it is returned to the 
sinus venosus through the hepatic sinuses. The blood is re- 
turned from the tail by the caudal vein. This vessel divides 
to form two renal portal veins, which break up into capillaries 
in the kidneys. From the kidneys the blood passes by means 
of the posterior cardinal sinuses to the Cuvierian sinuses, and 
so to the heart. The blood is red, and contains both red 
corpuscles and white corpulscles. 

The kidneys are two elongated bodies placed in the posterior 
part of the body, on either side of the middle line, behind the 
thick peritoneum. Their ducts (ureters) open into sinuses 
which open into the cloaca. 

Reproductive organs. — The ovary is single. There are 



Digitized 



by Google 



254 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

two oviducts united together by their inner ends, and com- 
municating by a single opening with the abdominal cavity. 
The opening occurs just at the junction of the two tubes, and 
is placed immediately in front of the liver. At their posterior 
ends the two oviducts unite, and open into the cloaca. Upon 
each oviduct is a large oviducal gland, which secretes the 
horny capsules of the egg. 

The male has a pair of testes placed in the abdominal 
cavity. Each testis opens by numerous fine ducts (vasa 
efferentia) into an organ which lies in direct line with, but in 
front of, the kidney of its side. This organ is the mesonephros, 
which in the Dog-fish functions as the epididymis. The duct 
from the mesonephros is the vas deferens, and it dilates to 
form both a vesicula seminalis and a sperm sae at its posterior 
end. The two sperm sacs unite together to form a sinus, the 
urinogenital sinus, into which the ureters open ; this sinus then 
opens into the cloaca. 

The Nervous system. — The brain can readily be exposed by 
slicing off the roof of the skull ; it can then be seen to con- 
sist of olfactory lobes, small cerebral hemispheres, a thala- 
mencephalon, two optic lobes, a cerebellum, and a medulla 
oblongata. This is continued as the spinal cord. 

The cerebral nerves can be very readily studied in this 
animal. The first pair go to the olfactory organs, the second 
to the eyes ; the third, fourth, and sixth pierce the wall of the 
orbit and pass to eye muscles; the fifth and seventh each 
give off a branch (ophthalmic divisions) which pierce the orbit 
and run forwards on its inner wall ; the fifth further divides in 
the orbit into two divisions, which fork over the angle of the 
mouth ; the seventh also divides into two more branches, one 
of which goes forward to the palate, while the other forks 
over the spiracle; the eighth goes to the auditory organs; 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE DOG-FISH (SCYLLIUM CANICULA). 255 



the ninth forks over the first gill slit, and the tenth gives off 
branches which fork over the remaining gill slits, and is 
then itself continued on to supply the heart and stomach. 

The spinal nerves have two roots, a single dorsal one and 
a multiple ventral one. 

The eyes, olfactory organs, and auditory organs are well 
developed, but no external auditory apertures occur. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHAPTER XXV. 
GENERAL REVIEW OF THE MAMMALIA. 

THE main characteristic of the Mammalia is that the young 
are nourished, for a variable period after birth, by the 
mother's milk. 

Mammals are divided into three classes : the Monotremata, 
the Marsupialia, and the Placentalia. 

The Monotremata include the Duckmole (Ornithorhynchus) 
inhabiting Australia and Tasmania; the Echidna found in 
Australia, Tasmania, and New Guinea, and the Pro-echidna 
living in New Guinea. In these animals the skin is covered 
with soft fur, or hairs and spines, the skull is smooth, the sutures 
being obliterated, the surface of the brain is not convoluted, the 
alimentary canal ends in a cloaca, the ureters open not into the 
bladder, but into the urethra, and the testes in the male do not 
come down into a scrotum, but remain in the abdomen. In 
the female the left ovary is larger than the right, and the young 
are hatched outside the animal — that is, the Monotremata lay 
eggs. 

The Marsupialia include the Kangaroo, Opossum, etc. In 

these animals the skeleton presents several peculiarities ; there 

are two bones in front of the symphysis pubis called the 

epipubic or marsupial bones. The scrotal sac lies in front of 

the penis, and the period during which the embryo remains 

within the uterus of the mother is short (five weeks in the 

956 



Digitized 



by Google 




§-s 

■Si 

•38 



8^ 






^K" 



11 

« ... 

5.5 



ft* 



5 

75 fyT 



8. 

c 

g 



1* 

P 

si 

2 i 






17 



Digitized 



by Google 



258 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, 



Kangaroo). The young are born prematurely, and are then 
carried in the external pouch or marsupium for some time, 
being nourished by the mother. 

The Plaoentalia are characterised by the close connection 
by means of a placenta between the uterus of the mother and 
the embryo during gestation. The blood of the mother and 
the blood of the foetus come into close relationship with each 




Fig. 132.— Skeleton of a hand of— a, Orang; b, Dog; c t Pig; d, Ox; e t Tapir; 
/, Horse (after Gegenbauer and Claus). R t radius; U, ulna; A, scaphoid; 
B, semi-lunar ; C, cuneiform ; D, trapezium ; E t trapezoid ; F f osmagnum ; 
G, unciform ; P t pisiform ; Cc t centrale ; M f metacarpus. 

other, the foetus obtaining all its nourishment, including oxygen, 
from the blood of the mother. 

All Mammals are quadrupeds, with the exception of the 
Sirenia (Sea-cows) and Cetacea (Whales, Dolphins), in which 
the hind limbs have either disappeared or are rudimentary, but 
Man is the only Mammal, which habitually walks erect. 

The external appearance differs considerably in different 
orders ; whilst some Mammals are aquatic, and have a fish-like 



Digitized 



by Google 



GENERAL REVIEW OF THE MAMMALIA. 259 



appearance (Whales, Porpoises, Dolphins, Sea-cows) ; others, 
such as the Ornithorhynchus, have bodies adapted for both 
land and water, and again others are only fitted for a purely 
terrestrial life. 

The Cetacea are peculiar in possessing no external ears. 
The extremities of Mammals present several variations, as to 
their length, as to the amount of fission with each other of 
different bones, and as to the complete disappearance of these 
bones. For instance, the hind limbs are only rudimentary in 
Cetacea. 

n 






Fig. 133.— Pedal skeleton of different genera of Equidae (after Marsh), a, 6, and c 
fossil forms ; a, foot of Orohippus (Eocene) ; 6, foot of Anchitherium (Lower 
Miocene) ; c, foot of Hipparion (Pliocene) ; d t foot of the recent genus Equus. 



In the large majority of cases the modifications occur chiefly 
in the foot and hand. In the family of the Equidae, to which 
the Horse belongs, the three-jointed middle digit alone touches 
the ground, the other toes having either partially or entirely 
disappeared ; but fossil forms are known in which there was 
not nearly so great a reduction of parts. 

Some Mammals, such as the Bat, are enabled to fly by the 
formation of a membrane, the patagium, which is an extension 
of the skin, and which stretches between the fore limbs and the 
body, and between the very long fingers, thus forming wings. 



Digitized 



by Google 



260 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



In the swimming Mammals the fore limbs are modified to 
form flipper-like organs, which function as fins. In all Mammals 
with the exception of the Monotremata, the coracoid bone is 
only represented by a process from the scapula (coracoid 
process). 

Skin. — Hairs are never entirely absent, although they are 
scanty in some forms, and in others only present in early 
life. 

In the Armadillo alone, amongst Mammals, there is a bony 
exoskeleton. 

Dentition. — Mammals differ from each other considerably 
in the number and character of their teeth. These generally 
either last throughout life, or are only once changed. The 
following is the typical mammalian dentition: three incisors, 
one canine, four premolars, and three molars on each side of 
either jaw. This is represented as a formula where i = incisors, 
c = canines, pm = premolars, and m = molars, the numerators 
representing the condition in the two sides of the upper, and 
the denominators of the lower jaw. Thus the typical dentition is 



U 3-3' 



i— i 



pm, 



4—4 
4_ 4 ' 



m. |— ^ = a total of 44 teeth. 



The following are the formulae in a few Mammals : — 



Opossum 



Dog 



Pig and Horse 



Sheep 



Cat 



Man 



5-5 
4-4' 
3—3 
3-3' 
3-3 
3-3' 
0—0 
3=3' 
3~3 
3-3' 
2—2 

2-2' 



I— I' 
I— I 

1— r 
1— 1 

0—0 
1— i' 
1— 1 
i-i' 

1— it 



pm. 
pm. 
pm. 



3—3 
3—3' 

4—4 
4-4' 
4—4 
4—4* 



Pm. 3=3, 
* 3-3' 

p m , 3^3 

r 2—2' 

pm, 2 — 2 

2=? 



4—4 
4—4' 
2—2 
3—3' 
3-3 
3—3* 
3-3 
3—3' 
1— 1 
1— i* 

3-3 
3-3* 



Digitized 



by Google 



GENERAL REVIEW OF THE MAMMALIA. 261 

The shape and character of the teeth vary according to the 
diet of the animal ; thus the Dolphin has a large number of 
uniform small teeth suited to grasp a slippery body like a 
Fish. In the baleen Whales the teeth are shed before birth, 
their place being partly supplied by plates of whalebone 
(baleen) developed on the palate. The carnivorous Mammals, 
like the Dog, have long and sharp canines, suitable for tearing 
food. The insectivorous Mammals have incisors which meet 
very accurately, to enable the animal to secure small active 
prey. Herbivora, like the Sheep, have incisors suited for 
cropping grass. In Man, as in other omnivorous Mammals, 
the teeth are fitted for masticating different kinds of food. 

The tongue is never absent, but it may be fused with the 
floor of the mouth, as in Whales. It may be specially adapted 
for seizing, as in Giraffes, or for capturing food, as in Ant-eaters. 
Salivary glands are present in all land forms, but are rudi- 
mentary or absent in the Whale. In Herbivora very large 
quantities of saliva are poured out for the purposes of moisten- 
ing the food, and converting the starch into sugar. The sides 
of the buccal cavity are soft and fleshy, and are dilated in 
some Rodents and Apes into wide sacs, the so-called cheek 
pouches. The soft palate, separating the posterior part of the 
nasal cavities from the pharynx, is peculiar to Mammals. The 
oesophagus is usually long, and opens into the stomach. The 
stomach is usually, as in Man, a simple sac, but it is often sub- 
divided by the enlargement of certain parts of it, and the 
partial separation of these parts from each other to form several 
chambers. Thus in Ruminants there are four divisions of the 
stomach, the paunch or rumen, the honeycomb bag or reticu- 
lum, the manyplies or psalterium, and the reed or abomasum. 
The food first passes into the paunch, which is characterised 
by having numerous villi on its surface ; it is here softened, 



Digitized 



by Google, 



262 



ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 



and is later regurgitated into the mouth. It is then well 
chewed (chewing the cud) and mixed with saliva. It is again 
swallowed, and now passes directly through the reticulum into 
the psalterium. The honeycomb bag, or reticulum, owes its 
name to the honeycomb-like appearance of its internal walls. 
The psalterium, or manyplies, functions as a filter; its walls 




Fig. 134.— Stomach of a Calf. Ru, Paunch or rumen ; R, reticulum ; O, psalterium 
or manyplies ; A, abomasum or rennet stomach ; Oe, end of oesophagus ; 
OR, oesophageal groove ; D f beginning of intestine (from Claus). 

are raised into numerous leaf-like folds. From the psalterium 
the food passes directly into the reed or abomasum, which is 
the true digestive stomach secreting the gastric juice. Between 
the small and large intestines there is a valve and a pouch, the 
caecum, which is small in Man, but in Herbiyora is very largely 
developed. The small intestine is long in Herbivora, short 
in Carnivora, and of medium length in Omnivora. 
The Respiratory organs consist of paired lungs enclosed in 



Digitized 



by Google 



GENERAL REVIEW OF THE MAMMALIA. 263 



mvn> 




Fig. 135.— Brains of Mammals (a, b, and c, after Gegenbauer ; and d, regne animal). 
a, of Rabbit, from above, with roof of right hemisphere removed so as to expose 
the lateral ventricle; b, the same, from below; c, brain of Cat, on the right 
side the lateral and posterior part of the hemisphere is removed and almost 
as much on the left side, the greater part of the hemispheres of the cerebellum 
have also been removed ; d, brain of Orang. Vh, cerebral hemispheres ; 
Mh, corpora quadrigemina ; Cb, cerebellum ; Mo, medulla oblongata ; Lo, 
olfactory lobe ; II, optic nerve ; VN, trigeminal ; VII, VIII, facial and 
auditory nerves ; H, hypophysis cerebri ; Th, optic thalamus ; Sr, sinus 
rhomboidalis. 



Digitized 



by Google 



264 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

a thorax, which is separated from the abdominal cavity by a 
muscular diaphragm. 

The kidneys occasionally consist of numerous lobes joined 
together at the pelvis, as in seals and dolphins, but usually 
they are compact bean-shaped organs. 

Reproduction. — In Ungulates, or hoofed animals, the young 
are born in a very highly developed condition, being capable 
of running almost immediately after birth. In the Cetacea 
the young are also very highly developed when they are born. 
In Man and in many other Mammals, the young are for a con- 
siderable time dependent upon their parents for protection, 
being quite unable either to escape from, or to defend them- 
selves against enemies. 

The oviducts of the female, except in Monotremes, unite at 
their lower ends for a variable extent. The young live during 
gestation in the lower parts of the separate or united oviducts, 
these parts being known as the single or double uterus. The 
upper parts of the oviducts are known as the Fallopian tubes. 

In different species there are differences in the extent to 
which the lower (uterine) portions of the oviducts are joined 
together — (1) They are quite separate as in Rodentia (Rabbits, 
Hares, Squirrels, Dormice, Rats, Mice, Guinea-pigs, Porcu- 
pines, etc.) ; (2) only the horns of the uterus are separate, the 
uterine portions of the oviducts being largely fused, as in 
Ungulata (Pigs, Hippopotamuses, Camels, Cattle, Deer, Tapirs, 
Rhinoceroses, Horses, and Elephants, etc.), Carnivora (Lions, 
Tigers, Foxes, Dogs, Bears, Otters, Seals, and Walruses), 
Cetacea (Whales, Dolphins, and Porpoises, etc.), and In- 
sectivora (Hedgehogs, Moles, Shrews, etc.); or (3) there is 
only a single cavity with muscular walls, the Fallopian tubes 
being continued right down to the single uterus, as in Primates 
(Lemurs, Marmosets, American monkeys, Baboons, Anthropoid 



Digitized 



by Google 



REVIEW OF THE MAMMALIA, 



Ac, 
Pc 



apes, and Man). There may be 
several pairs of mammary glands 
or only a single pair as in Man. 

The cerebral hemi- 
spheres are always well 
•developed in Mam- 
mals. In the lowest 
forms they are smooth 
on the surface ; in the 
somewhat higher forms 
they become more 
complex, owing to the 
formation of ridges and 
•depressions on the 
surface; and in the 
highest forms, as in 
Man, the ridges have 
become convolutions 
(gyri) separated from 
each other by deep 
grooves (sulci). 

The Pons varolii 
is but little developed 
in the lower forms, 



Fig. 136.— Skeleton of Gorilla 
(fromClaus). St, sternum; 
Sc, scapula ; Ac, acromion; 
Pc, coracoid process; CI, 
clavicle ; H, humerus ; 
R, radius; U, ulna; Os, 
sacrum; Jl, ilium; Js, 
ischium ; P, pubis ; Ft, fe- 
mur ; Pa, patella ; T, tibia; 
Ft, fibula; Ca, calca- 
neum ; A, astragalus. 




Digitized t 



266 ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. 

whereas in the higher forms it is increased, into a large 
swelling. 

In comparing Man with other mammals, it is easy to see 
characters in which he differs strikingly from the lower forms, 
but when one tries to separate him from the higher forms, such 
as the Anthropoid apes (Orangs, Chimpanzees, and Gorillas), 
one finds that the points of difference are comparatively few. 
It is true that he alone of the Anthropoidea is unable to 
oppose his big toe to the other toes of that foot, and that whilst 
Apes sometimes run on all fours he invariably walks erect ; he 
plants the soles of his feet flat on the ground ; he also has a 
better developed heel than any Monkey has, and his arms are 
shorter than his legs, the latter growing faster after birth than 
the former. None of these differences can however be looked 
upon as of much importance. 

The only essential difference is, that in Man the brain is 
much more highly developed than it is in the highest Apes. 
Thus, whilst the average weight of the human brain is forty-eight 
ounces, the Gorilla never possesses a brain exceeding twenty 
ounces in weight. With this greater development of brain 
goes the greater intellectual capacity of the human being. 

It is certain that man cannot lay claim to having arisen from 
an ancestral Ape similar to any of the known forms ; the most 
that can be said is that he and they have probably a common 
ancestor, but that in the struggle for existence he has out- 
stripped them and has attained a much higher condition of 
intellectual development. 



Digitized 



by Google 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



Acarus scabiei, 1 14 

Acetabulum, 125 

Achromatin (a, not ; xf>^ a i colour), 
20 

Aerobic (difo air; (ttos), applied to 
Bacteria, for the growth of 
which free oxygen is necessary, 

I7i. 175 
Acorn-shells, 104 
Actinozoa, 87 ; see Sea-anemones, 
Albumen gland, in Tapeworms, 226 
Aleurone grains, 18 
Algse(a(ga, seaweed), Thallophy tes 

containing chlorophyll, 63 
Alimentary or Digestive System — 

in Craniata, 131-134 

in Coelenterata, 83 

in Crustaceans, 102 

in Earth-worms, 94 

in Echinodermata, 97, 99, 100 

in Liver-fluke, 198 

in Gasteropoda, 118 

in Hydra, 194 

in Hydrozoa, 87, 89 

in Insecta, 108 

in Lamellibranchiata, 1 16 

in Leech, 242 

in Sea-anemones, 89 

in Sponges, 85 



Alternation of Generations — 
in Bryophytes, 67 
in Hydrozoa, 88 
in Phanerogamia, 76 
in Pteridophytes, 70, 71 
in Tape- worms, 214 
Amphioxus (&/M<pl } on both sides ; 
6£iJy, sharp), 121 
development of, 30, 32 
formation of mesoblast in, 37 
Amoeba (djuotjSdy, to change), 7, 
84, 156-160 
anatomy of, 157 
digestion in, 159 
figure of, 157 
physiology of, 158 
reproduction of, 160 
Anabolism (dyajSoXifr, that which is 
thrown up), the constructive 
processes, by which the proto- 
plasm is built up, 5 
Anal respiration — 
in Crustacea, 104 
in Insecta, 108 
Anaerobic (a, not; d^p, air; fttos, 
life), applied to Bacteria for 
the growth of which free 
oxygen is not necessary, 171, 

175. 
Anatomy (dvaT<yM$, dissection) — 
of Amoeba, 157, 158 



967 



Digitized 



by Google 



268 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



Anatomy {continued) — 

of Dog-fish, 253 

of Gregarina, 184, 185 

of Hydra, 190 

of Leech, 242 

of Liver-fluke, 198 

of Protococcus pluvialis, 161 

of Protococcus viridis, 164 

of Round-worms, 229 

of Tape-worms, 218 

of Vorticella, 177 

of Yeast plant, 16 1 
Ancylostomum duodenalis, 234, 

235 

figure, 235 
Androecium (Ayrjp, a male; oUos, 

a house), the male organs of 

a flower, 74 
Angiosperms (ayyeioVf a vessel ; 

<nrepfxa t a seed), fertilisation 

and development of, 78 
Anguillulidae, 230 
Annelids (annetlus, a little ring), 91, 

94 

Anther, 74 

Antheridium, male organ in the 

lower plants, 71 
Antherozoid, the male reproductive 

cell in the lower plants. 
Anus, the posterior opening of the 

alimentary canal. 
Apex (growing point) — 
of Angiosperms, 60 
of Ferns, 61, 73 
of Mosses, 61 
Apus, 105 

Arachnoidea, 102, 105, 112-116 
circulatory system of, 113 
figures, 113, 114, 115 
respiratory system of, 1 12, 

114 
spinning glands of, 113 
stinging organ of, 112 



Archegonium (dpx^yoroy, the first 

of a race), female organ in 

lower plants, 1 
Archenteron (dpx c » chief; trrepov, 

an intestine), cavity of diblas- 

tula, 31 
Area opaca, 35 
Area pellucida, 35 
Armadillo, 260 
Arrow-worms, 96 
Arthropoda (apQpov, a joint ; irotfs, 

a foot), 102 
Arthrospore (apOpov, a joint ; <riropd, 

a seed), in Bacteria, 173 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 231-233 

figure, 231 
Asci (&<tk6s, a bag), spore-bearing 

branches of certain fungi, 65 
Ascospores, spores borne on asci, 

65 
Auditory sense capsules, 130 
Auricle (auricula, the outer ear), 

140, 142 
Axial cylinder of Bryophytes, 69 
Axis cylinder, 50 



B 

Bacilli (baciilum, a little stick), 

173, 174 
Bacteria' (fiaKT-fipiov, a little staff), 
170-175 

anatomy of, 1 70 

diseases due to, 1 72 

fermentation due to, 171 

figure of, 173 

putrefaction due to, 171 

reproduction of, 172 

zoogloea condition of, 172 
Balanoglossus, 121 
Barnacles, 102, 104, 105 
Bast, 56 

fibres, 56 



Digitized 



by Google 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



269 



Bifid (bis, twice ; findo, I cleave), 


c 


forked, divided into two. 




Bilharzia haematobia, 91 


Caecum (ccecus, blind), 135 


Biology (0fo$, life; \byos, a dis- 


Calyx («iXv£, the cup of a flower), 


course), the science of life, I 


the whorl of cepals in Angio- 


Bioplasm (fttos, life ; xXdo-fxa, any- 


sperms, 75 


thing moulded), see Proto- 


Cambium (cambio, to change), 56 


plasm. 


fascicular, 56 


Birds, appendages of, 127 


interfascicular, 56 


Blastoderm, blastodermic area 


Capillaries (capillaris, like a hair), 


((3\a<rr6s, a bud ; depfia, skin), 


H3 


3L32 


Carbo-hydrates, 5 


figure, 34 


Carnivorous plants, 81 


Blastopore (/JXeurrdj, a bud ; x6pos, 


Carpel (jta/wr6y, fruit), 75 


a passage), the opening of the 


Carpus (ica/>jr6$, the wrist), 127 


diblastula to the exterior, 31 


Cartilage, 43, 45 


Blastula (dim. of ^Xcwrdj, a bud), 


figure, 46 


29 


Cell (cella, a chamber), 6 


figures, 31, 32 


figures, 7 


Blood, 51, 138 


history of, 19 


Body-cavity, formation of, 37, 38 


Cell- division, 20, 23 


in Coelomata, 83 


direct and indirect, 20 


in Earth-worm, 94 


figure, 21 


in Leech, 248 


Cell-membrane, 10 


in Liver-fluke, 200 


Cell-sap, 6, 13 


in Nematodes, 230 


description of, 15 


in Round-worms, 230 


Cell-wall, 6, 13, 15 


in Tape-worms, 222 


animal cell, 13 


in Vertebrates, 123, 139 


figure, 10 


Bone, 43, 45 


plant cell, 13-19 


figure, 46 


figures, 11, 14 


Botany (Pordrq, a herb), the part 


typical cell, 10-13 


of Biology which relates to 


Cellulose, substance of which plant 


plants. 


cell-walls are composed, 13 


Bothriocephalus latus, 215 


absence in plants, 81 


Branchiae {Pp&yxia, gills), 135 


presence in animals, 81 


Brain, 146 


Centipedes (centum, a hundred ; 


Bristle- bearing worms, 94 


pes, a foot), 106 


Bryophytes (fiptiov, moss ; 4>vt6j>, a 


Central corpuscles, 22 


plant), 63, 66-70; alternation 


Cephalochorda (ice^aXiJ, the head ; 


of generations in, 67; axial 


XOpSiJ, a chord), 121 


cylinder of, 69 


Cephalopoda (ice^aXiJ, the head; 


Bundle sheath, 57, 60 


irovs, a foot), 116, 119 



Digitized 



by Google 



TJO 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



Cephalopoda {continued) — 


Cloaca (cloaca, sewer), the common 


nervous system of, 1 19 


sewer, a cavity into which the 


respiratory system of, 119 


alimentary and genito-urinary 


sensory organs of, 119 


canals open, 135 


vascular system of 119 


Club-moss, see Pteridophytes, 


Cephalo-thorax (K€<pa\rj y the head ; 


Cnidoblast (tcvLdrj, a nettle; p\aor6s, 


d&paZ, the chest) — 


a bud), in Hydra, 192 


in Arachnoidea, 1 12 


Cnidocil (Kvldij ; cilium, an eyelash), 


in Crustacea, 103 


in Hydra, 192 


Cercariae (k^mcos, the tail) — 


Coccidia, 183 


of Distomum haematobium, 91 


Cocoon (*£yici7, a shell), m 


of Liver-fluke, 206 


Coelenterata, 83, 87-90 


Cerebral hemispheres, 147 


alternation of generations in, 


Cestodes (ice<rr6y, a studded girdle), 


88 


91, 92, 208 


Coelenteron (koCKos, hollow; (vre- 


Cetacea (cetus, a whale), 259 


pov, an intestine), see Arc/ten- 


Chaetopoda, 94 


teron, 38 


Chara, 66 


Coelomata, 84, 90-119 


Chick, development of, 31 


Coelome (KoLXupui, a hollow), see 


Chitin, horny substance present in 


Body-camty. 


many epidermal structures. 


Collenchymatous tissue,see Tissues. 


Chlorophyll (xXwp6 j, green ; <pv\\ov, 


Conceptacle (conceptaculum, a place 


a leaf), green colouring matter 


of conception), 66 


of plants, 15 


Conidia (*c6m, dust), spores found 


figure, 18 


in some fungi, 65 


absence in plants, 80 


Conjugation (cum, together; jugum, 


presence in animals, 81 


a yoke), the union of two cells 


Chrysalis (xpwr6$, gold), ill 


for the purpose of reproduction. 


Cilia (ct'lium, an eyelash), a deli- 


in Amoeba, 160 


cate motile process of proto- 


in Gregarina, 186 


plasm ; a flagellum. 


in Vorticella, 181 


Circulatory system — 


Connective tissue, see Tissues. 


in Craniata, 138-144 


Contractile or pulsating vacuole, 


in Crustacea, 103 


158. 180 


in Echinodermata, 97, 100 


Convoluta Roscoffensis, 81 


in Insecta, 108, 109 


Coracoid, 125 


in Lamellibranchiata, 118 


Coral, 89, 90 


in Leech, 247 


Corium or true skin, 130 


in Earth-worms, 94 


Cork cambium, 58 


Cirrus-sac (cirrus, a lock of curled 


Corpora quadrigemina, 148 


hair), in liver-fluke, 201, 225 


Corpuscle (corpusculum, dim. of 


Clitellum (clitellce, a pack-saddle), 


corpus, body), 51, 138 


in Leech, 242 


Cortex {cortex, bark), 55 



Digitized 



by Google 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



271 



Corolla (corolla, a little wreath), the 
inner whorl of the perianth 
of Angiosperms, made up of 
petals, 75 

Cotyledons (KoriXrjdiw, a cup), the 
seed leaf of the vegetable 
embryo, 78 

Crabs, 102, 105 

Cranial nerves, 1 50 

Craniata (cranium, a skull), 1 21- 

155 
alimentary system of, 1 31-134 
appendages of, anterior, 125-127; 

posterior, 127, 128 
circulatory system of, 138-144 
excretory system of, 1 34, 135, 

144-146 
figures of, 124, 126, 128, 129, 132, 

134, 136, 138, I39i 141, 143, 

145, 146, 147, 148, 149. 15 h 

153, 154 
lymphatic system of, 144 
nervous system of, 1 46- 1 50 
reproductive system of, 152- 

'55 

respiratory system of, 135-138 

sense organs of, 150-152 

skeleton of, 121-130 

visceral skeleton of, 1 23 
Cranium (Kpbviov, the skull), 129 
Crayfish, 104, 105 
Crop, 133 

Crustacea (crusfa, the rind, crust), 
102, 105 

alimentary system, 102 

appendages of, 102, 103 

blood vascular system of, 103 

cephalo-thorax of, 103 

exoskeleton of, 102 

figures of, 103, 104 

reproduction and development 
of (metamorphosis), 105 

respiratory system of, 104 



Crypotogamia (Kpinrrbs, hidden ; 

7a/*oj, nuptials), flowerless 

plants, 70 
Crystalloids, 18 
Cuticle (dim. of cutis, skin), 54, 

I79> 1*4, 192, 221, 229 
Cuttle-fishes, 116 
Cysticercus (kikttis, a bladder; 

icepKot, a tail), in tape-worms. 



Demodex folliculorum, 115 

figures, 114 
Development, 23 et seq. 
of Crustacea, 105 
of Gregarina, 186, 187 
of Hydra, 195, 196 
of Insecta, no, in 
of Liver-fluke, 203-207 
of Phanerogamia, 76-78 
of Skull, 128 
of Starfish, 100 
of Tape- worms, 210-218 
Diaphragm (haippayfia, a partition 

wall), 137 
Diblastula condition of embryo 
(dim. of pkaarbs, a bud), 30. 
See Gastrula. 
Dicotyledons (6ls, twice; kotH\tiSiov, 

a cup), 78 
Differences between plants and 

animals, 79, 82 
Digestive system, see Alimentary 

system. 
Dipnoi (5/y, twice; irvo-fi, breath), 

135 
Disc, in Vorticella, 179 
Distomum haematobium, 91 

figure, 92 
Dog- fish, 122 

alimentary system of, 252 

anatomy of, 252 

circulatory system of, 253 



Digitized 



by Google 



272 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



Dog-fish (continued) — 
excretory system of, 253 
nervous system of, 254 
reproductive system of, 253 
respiratory system of, 253 
sense organs of, 255 

Dragon-flies, no 

Drosera, 81, 82 

Duckmole, 256 



Ear, 152 
Earth-worms, 94-96 

figures, 93, 95 
Echidna, 256 

Echinodermata (tyivos, a hedgehog; 
depfxa, the skin), 96-100 
alimentary system of, 99 
blood vascular system of, 100 
calcareous skeleton of, 99 
excretory system of, 100 
figures of, 97, 98, 10 1 
nervous system of, 99 
reproductive system of, 100 
respiratory system of, 100 
Echiuridae, 94 

Ectoplasm (iKTos, outside), peri- 
pheral layer of protoplasm, 13 
in Amoeba, 157 
in Gregarina, 184 
in Vorticella, 176 
Ectoderm (e/cros, outside; dlppa, the 

skin), see Epiblast. 
Ectosarc (itcros, outside; <rap{, 

flesh), see Ectoplasm. 
Egg-cell, see Ovum. 
Embryo (euPpvw, a foetus), the 
name given to a young animal 
or plant whilst it is still un- 
able to lead an independent 
existence. 
Embryo sac, 75 



Encystment — 
in Gregarina, 186 
in Protococcus, 165 
in Vorticella, 182 
in Tape- worms, 211 
Endoderm (fr&ov, within ; 8epfia r 

skin), 30. See Hypoblast. 
Endogenous spore formation,(ei'8(»'; 

ycvvcub, to produce), 161, 162 
Endonucleus (Mov, within), 12 
Endoplasm (h8w, within), internal 
portion of protoplasm, 13, 157 
in Amoeba, 157 
in Gregarina, 184, 185 
in Vorticella, 176 
Endosarc (evdov, within; <rap% r 

flesh), see Endoplasm. 
Endosmosis (evdov, within; cta/ifo, 
a thrusting in), diffusion of a 
liquid through a membrane, 
from without inwards, 183 
Enteron (evrepov, an intestine), 190 
Entomostraca, 105 
Epiblast (brl, upon ; fiXaarbs, a 
bud), the outer of the three 
primitive germ layers, 30 
structures derived from, 38 
figure, 39 
Epidermis (£ttL, upon; Sepfia, the 

skin), S3, 130 
Epididymis (iirt, upon ; MSvfioi, the 

testicles), 155, 254 
Epiglottis, 137 

Epithelial tissue, see Tissues. 
Ethmoid bones, 130 
Eurotium — 
figure, 64 

reproduction of, 64, 65 
Eustachian tubes, 133 
Excretory system — 
in Amoeba, 159 
in Craniata, 134, 135, 144-146 
in Earth-worms, 94 



Digitized 



by Google 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



273 



Excretory system (continued )- 

in Echinodermata, 100 

in Insecta, no 

in Lamellibranchiata, 118 

in Leech, 245 

in Liver-fluke, 200 

in Vorticella, 180 
Exoskeleton — 

in Crustacea, 102 

in Armadillo, 260 
Eye, 152 



Faeces (fax, sediment), 134, 135 
Falciform body (falx, a sickle; 
forma, resemblance), in Gre- 
garina, 187 
Fats, 5 

Fat tissue, 46 

Femur (femur, the thigh), 127 
Fermentation due to Bacteria, 171 
Fern, see Pteridophytes. 
Fertilisation, 23-28 

figure, 27 
Fertilising canal, in Tape- worms, 226 
Fibrovascular bundles (fibra, a 
small thread; vasculum, a 
little vessel), 53, 55 

figure, 57 
Fibula, 127 
Filament, 74 
Filaria medinensis, 238 

figure, 239 
Filaria sanguinis hominis, 238-240 
Fins, 124 

Fish, appendages of, 127 
Fission — 

in Amoeba, 160 

in Bacteria, 172 

in Gleocapsa, 168 

in Hydra, 194 

in Protococcus, 164 

in Vorticella, 180, 181 



Fission fungi, see Bacteria 
Flagella (flagellum, a whip)— 

in Bacteria, 172 

in Hydra, 193 

in Protococcus, 165 
Flat- worms, 91 

Flowering plants, see Phanerogamia 
Food vacuoles — 

in Amoeba, 158 

in Vorticella, 180 
Frog, 133 
Frontal bone (frons, the forehead), 

130 
Fucus, Bladder wrack, 66 

figure, 65 
Fungi (fungus, a mushroom), 
Thallophytes containing no 
chlorophyll, 63 



Gall-mites, 115 

Ganglion (yayy\iov, a swelling), an 
enlargement in the course of 
a nerve. 
Ganglion cells, 49 
Gasteropoda (ya<rri]p, the stomach ; 
irovs, sl foot), 116, 118 
alimentary system, 118 
respiratory system, 118 
Gastrula condition of embryo 
(yao-r/ip, the stomach), con- 
dition in which the embryo 
consists of a two-layered sac, 
30 
Gemmation (gemma, a bud) — 
in Hydra, 194 
in Hydrozoa, 87, 88 
in Sponges, 86 
in Yeast plant, 161, 162 
Genital cloaca, in Tape-worms, 227 
Genital pore, in Tape-worms, 227 
Germ-cell, see Ovum Spermato- 
zoon, and Sperm Mother-cell, 

18 



Digitized 



by Google 



274 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



Germ-disc, 29 

figures, 29, 30, 33 
Germinal spot (nucleolus of ovum), 

24 
Germinal vesicle (nucleus of ovum), 

24 
Gills, 123 
Gill-slits, 123 

Gland, a collection of cells forming 
a secretory or excretory organ. 
Glenoid cavity, 125 
Gleocapsa, 168, 169 
anatomy of, 168 
physiology of, 169 
reproduction of, 168 
Glomerulus (dim. of glomus \ a ball 

of thread), 145 
Glottis,. 137 
Gordiidae, 230 

Gregarinae (gregarius, belonging 
to a flock), 183-187 
anatomy of, 184, 185 
figure of, 185 
reproduction o£ 186, 187 
Gregarinidae (gregarius, belonging 

to a flock), 84, 183 
Groi nd tissue, see Tissues. 
Growing point, see Apex. 
Guard cells, 54 

Gymnosperms (yvjivds, naked ; 
triripfjLa, a seed), 78 
fertilisation and development of, 

76-78 
figure of, 77 
Gynoecium (yvv-ff, a female; o?kos, 
a house), the female organ of 
a flower, 75 

H 

Haemoglobin (afyta, blood; globus, 

a round body), 138 
Haematococcus pluvialis, see Proto- 

coccus pluvialis, 164 



Hairs — 
animal, 38, 131 
plant, S3 
figure of, 53 
Harvest mites, 115 
Heart- 
in Craniata, 139 
in Crustacea, 104 
in Dog-fish, 253 
in Lamellibranchiata, 118 
Hepatic portal circulation, 141 
Hermaphrodite ('Ep/^s, Mercury; 
Atppodlri), Venus), applied to 
animals and plants in which 
both male and female organs 
are present. 
Hemichorda, 121 
Hermit-crab, 105 
Hirudinae, 94, 96 
Hirudo medicinalis, see Leech. 
Horsetails, see Pteridophytes. 
Host, the organism in which a 

parasite lives. 
Humerus, 127 
Hyaloplasm (faXos, glass), clear 

part of protoplasm, 12, 13 
Hydatid (Warts, a watery vesicle), 

of Tape-worms, 211 
Hydra (%a, a water serpent), 188- 
196 
anatomy of, 190 
digestive system of, 194 
figures of, 189, 191 
fusca, 190 

muscular system, 192, 
presence of chlorophyll in, 81 
reproductive system in, 194 
viridis, 81, 190 
vulgaris, 190 
Hydrozoa, 87-89 
alimentary system of, 87 
alternation of generations of, 88 
figure, 88 



Digitized 



by Google 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



275 



Hydrozoa {continued) — 
nervous system of, 89 
reproductive system of, 87, 88 
Hyoid arch, 130 
Hyoid bone, 130 

Hyphse (v<f>atwu t to weave), separate 
filaments of a fungus 
aerial, 65 
mycelial, 65 
submerged, 64 
Hypoblast (far6, under ; /SXcurrfa, a 
bud), the inner layer of the 
three primitive germ layers, 
30 
structures derived from, 39 
Hypostome (pird, under; trTo/ia, 
the mouth), in Hydra, 191 



I 

Ilium, 125 

Imago (imago, a likeness), 1 1 1 

Infusoria, 84. See Vorticella. 

Insecta, 102, 105, 106- 112 
alimentary system of, 108 
appendages of, 108 
circulatory system of, 108, 109 
excretory system of, 1 10 
figures, 106, 107, 109, in 
metamorphosis of, no, in, 

112 
muscular system of, 108 
nervous system of, 108 
reproductive system of, 1 10 
respiratory system of, 107, 108 
sensory organs of, 107, 108 

Integument — 
of Craniata, 130 
of Tape- worms, 221 

Intercellular digestion of Hydra, 
194 

Intercellular substance, 44 

Intestine, 133, 134 



Intracellular digestion — 
in Amoeba, 159 
in Hydra, 194 
in Vorticella, 180 
Invagination (in, into; vagina, a 
sheath), the pushing in of one 
part into another, 30 
Invertebrate, 83-119 
Ischium, 125 



Jaws, 130 
Jelly-fish, 89 

K 

Kangaroo, 256 

Karyokinesis (tcdpov, a kernel; 
dprjais, a movement), changes 
which take place in the nu- 
cleus, 20 

Katabolism (/caraj8o\i$, a laying 
down), the destructive pro- 
cesses, by which the proto- 
plasm is broken down into 
simpler substances, 5 

Keimplasma (keim, germ), 24 

Kidneys, in Craniata, 144, 145 

King crab, 112, 115 



Lachrymals, 130 

Lacteals (lac, milk), 144 

Lamellibranchiata (lamella, a plate ; 
pp&yxta, gills), 1 1 6- 118 
alimentary system of, 116 
circulatory system of, 118 
excretory system of, 118 
figure of, 117 
muscular system of, 116 
nervous system of, 118 



Digitized 



by Google 



276 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



Lamellibranchiata {continued) — 
reproductive system of, 1 18 
respiratory system of, 117 
water vascular system of, 117 

Larva (larva, a mask), the young 
of Insecta, etc., in their first 
stage of metamorphosis. 

Larynx, 137 

Leaves, structure of, 62 

Leech, 94 
alimentary system of, 242 
anatomy of, 242 
excretory system of, 245 
nervous system of, 250 
reproductive system of, 249 
vascular system of, 247 

Lichen, 66 

Limulus, 115 

Liver, 133, 134 

Liver-fluke — 
alimentary system of, 198 
anatomy of, 198 
excretory system of, 200 
figures of, 199, 202, 204 
life history of, 203 
nervous system of, 200 
reproductive system of, 201 

Liverworts, 67-70 

Lobsters, 102, 105 

Lob-worms, 96 

Lungs, 137 

Lymph (lympha, water), 51, 144 

Lymphatic system in Craniata, 144 

M 

Macrosporangium, 75 

Macrospore (/xaKpos, great; cnropL 
a seed), a spore, from which 
a female prothallium develops, 
71, 166 

Madreporic plate, 98 

Malocostraca, 105 

Malpighian body, 146 



Mammalia (mamma, a breast) — 
alimentary system of, 261 
dentition of, 260 
excretory system of, 264 
reproduction of, 264 
respiration of, 262 
Mandibular arch, 130 
Man us, 127 
Marsupialia (marsupium, a pouch 

256 
Maxillae, 130 
Mayflies, no 
Medulla oblongata, 148 
Medullary rays, 56 
Medullary sheath (medulla, mar- 
row), 50 
Medusoid (M.45ovsa, one of the 

Gorgons), 87 
Mehlis' body, 226 
Men stem tissue (jAe/xorfo, divided), 

see Tissues. 
Mesenteron (MAros, middle; h- 

repov, an intestine), 38 
Mesoblast (M&o?, middle ; pXao-rbs, 
a bud), the middle of the three 
primitive germ layers, 37 
figure, 38 

structures derived from, 39 
Meso-nephros, 155 
Mesophyll, spongy, 62 
Meso-thorax, 108 

Metabolism QjLeTapoXrj, a change), 
the chemical changes which 
take place during the life his- 
tory of protoplasm. See 
Anabolism and Katabolism, 5 
Metamorphosis — 
of Crustacea, 105 
of Insecta, no, in, 112 
Metathorax, 108 

Metazoa (jierd, after; &ov, an 
animal), animals whose bodies 
consist of more than one cell, 83 



Digitized 



by Google 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY, 



277 



Mesoglcea (p^cos, middle; y\ola t 

glue), 192 
Micrococci, 173 
Microsporangium, 74, 75 
Microspore (puxpos, small ; airopd, a 
seed), a spore from which a 
male prothallium develops, 
71, 166 
Millipedes, 106 
Mites, 112, 114, 115 
Mollusca, 1 1 6- 1 18 
Monocotyledons {fibvos, single ; 

KortXydiov, a cup), 78 
Monotremata (p.6vos, single ; Tprjput, 
a hole), animals which have 
only one external open- 
ing, 256 
Morula (dim. of tnorum, a mul- 
berry)— 
hollow, 29 
solid, 29 
Mosses, 66-70 

figure, 68. See Bryophytes. 
Motor root, 150 
Moulds, 64 
Mullerian duct, 154 
Muscle — 

smooth or non-striated, 47 
striated, 47 
Muscular system — 
in Echinodermata, 99 
in Hydra, 192 
in Insecta, 108 
in Lamellibranchiata, 116 
Muscular tissue, see Tissues. 
Mussel, 116-118 

Mycellium (/jlvktis, a fungus), a 
felt-like mass formed of inter- 
woven hyphse, 65 
Myophan striation (/ifa, muscle ; 

<palv<a, to appear), 180 
Myriapoda, 102, 105, 106 
My sis stage, 105 



N 
Nasal sense capsules, 130 
Nasal sense organs, 152 
Nauplius, 105 
Nemathelminthes, 91 
Nematocyst (yrjpua, a thread ; jrwrct , 

a bag), in Hydra, 192 
Nematodes (vrjpa, a thread), 94, 
229-240 
alimentary system o f , 229 
development of, 23c, 231 
excretory system of, 229 
muscular system of, 229 
nervous system of, 229 
reproductive system of, 229 
sensory system of, 230 
Nephridium (ve<pp6s, a kidney), in 

worms, 90, 93, 94 
Nemertines, 92, 93 
Nerve cells, 49 
Nervous system — 
in Craniata, 146-150 
in Echinodermata, 97 
in Hydrozoa, 89 
in Insecta, 108 
in Liver-fluke, 200 
in Worms, 90, 93, 94 
Nervous tissue, see Tissues. 
Nitella (nitio, to shine), 66 

figure, 67 
Notochord, (v&tos, the back ; 
XopfoJ, a string), a solid rod of 
cells, pinched off from the ' 
dorsal region of the hypoblast, 
during development in verte- 
brates, 122 
sheath of, 120, 122 
Nucellus (dim. of nucleus), 78 
Nucleolus, 6 

Nucleus {nucleus, a kernel), 6, 11, 
12 
aster stage of, 22 
coil stage of, 20 



Digitized 



by Google 



278 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



Nucleus {continued) — 
diaster stage of, 22 
figure, 13 
resting, 20 



Occipital bone, 130 
(Esophagus, 133 
Olfactory lobes, 147 
Oligochaeta, 94 
Opossum, 256 
Optic lobes, 148 
Ornithorynchus, 256 
Ovary (ovum, an egg)— 

in Craniata, 153 

in Dogfish, 253 

in Earth-worm, 95 

in Echinodermata, 100 

in Hydra, 194, 195 

in Insecta, no 

in Leech, 250 

in Liver-fluke, 202 

in Mollusca, 118 

in Phanerogaraia, 75 

in Tape-worm, 226 
Oviduct (ovum, an egg; duco, I 
lead), the tube which conveys 
ova from the ovary to the 
exterior. 
Ovule (dim. of ovum), 75 
Ovum (ovum, an egg) — 

description of, 24 
figures, 10, 27, 32 

segmentation of, 28 
figures, 28-36 
Oxyuris vermicularis, 233 

figure, 232 



Pancreas (trw, all; Kpeas, flesh), 

134 
Parenchymatous tissue, see Tis- 
sues, 



Parachordals (vapb, near ; x o P&b a 

string), 130 
Paranucleus (irap&, beside; nucleus), 

180 
Parasite (irapdffiTos, one who lives 

at other people's tables). 
Parietal bones (paries, a wall), 130 
Parthenogenesis (vapdevos, a virgin ; 

yevevis, origin), 23 
Pectoral girdle, 124, 125 
Pedicelli, 97 
Pelvic girdle, 125 
Penaeus, 105 
Penicillium (penicillium, a brush), 

reproduction of, 64 
Pentastomata (irtrre, five; <tt6/m, 

a mouth), 115 
figure, 115 
Pericardium (irepl, about; xapdla, 

the heart), 138 
Peripatus, 106 
Peristome (irepl, around; ardfrn, 

the mouth), 178 
Peritoneal cavity, the part of the 

body-cavity below the dia- 
phragm. 
Permanent tissue, see Tissues. 
Pes (pes, foot), 127 
Petals (irtTiXov, a leaf), 74 
Phanerogamia (Qtoepow, to make 

manifest ; yap.6s, nuptials), 

63, 73-78 
fertilisation and development of, 

76-78 
figures, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77 
Pharynx (<papvy£, the throat), 131 
Phloem (<p\olos, bark), 56 
Phycocyan, 16 
Phycoerythrin, 16 
Phycophaein, 16 
Physiology (<p{/ais, nature ; \6yos, a 

discourse) — 
of Amoeba, 158, 160 



Digitized 



by Google 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



279 



Physiology {continued) — 

of Hydra, 193 

of Protococcus pluvialis, 166 

of Protoplasm, 4, 

of Yeast plant, 162 
Pineal gland, 147 
Pistil, 75 
Pith, 56 
Pituitary body (pituita, mucus), 

Placentalia (ttXclkovs, a flat cake), 

258 
Plant structure, 62-78 
Plathelminthes, 91 
Plexus (ptecto, to twist, or weave). 
Plumule (plumuia, a little feather), 

78 
Polar bodies, or vesicles, 25 

figure, 25 
Polian vessels, 99 
Pollen grain, 75 
Pollen sac, 75 
Pollen tube, 76, 77 
Polychaeta, 96 
Polycystidia, 184 
Polypite, 87, 89 
Pons varolii, 148 
Porifera, 85 
Porpoise, 259 
Praecoracoids, 125 
Praemaxillae, 130 
Primary vesicles, 147 

first, 147 

second, 147, 148 

third, 148 
Primitive streak, 34 

figure, 34 
Proctodeum (tt/wktos, the anus ; 
65aibsj belonging to a way), 

131 

Pro-echidna, 256 
Proglottis, 208 
Pronephros, 154 



Pronucleus— 
female, 25 
male, 27 
Proscolex, bladder-worm, 211 
Prosenchymatous tissue, see Tis- 
sues. 
Proteids (t/kDtos, first), 4 
Prothallium (irpo, before ; OaXKos, a 
twig), the sexual generation of 
Pteridophytes, etc., 71 
Pro-thorax, 108 
Protococcus pluvialis, 164-169 
anatomy of, 165 
physiology of, 166 
reproduction of, 166 
respiration of, 167 
Protococcus viridis, 164 
anatomy of) 164 
figure, 165 
reproduction of, 164 
Protoplasm (irpwros, first ; irX&sfia, 
anything moulded) — 
characters of, 3 
chemical composition of, 4 
effects of changes of temperature, 

electricity, etc., on, 8 
history of, 8 
movements in, 6 
need of water, 8 
presence in plant cell, 13 
respiration of, 7 
Protozoa (wpuros, first ; {wo*, an 
animal), animals whose bodies 
consist of one cell only, 83 
Protracheata, 102, 105, 106 
Pseudonavicella (<pevdfy, false ; 

navicula, a little boat), 186 
Pseudopodium (<f>€udr)s, false ; trovs, 

foot), 157, 158 
Psorosperms, 84, 183 
Pteridophytes, 63, 70-73 

alternation of generations in, 
70, 71 



Digitized 



by Google 



28o 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



Pteridophytes {continued) — 
figures, 69, 70, 71, 72 

fibrovascular bundle of, 72 

leaf of, 70, 73 

root of, 73 

stem of, 73 
Pubis, 125 

Pulmonary circulation, 142 
Pulsating vacuole, 158, 180 
Pupa, 1 1 1 

Putrefaction due to Bacteria, 171 
Pyrenoid, 165 



Rabbit, reproduction of, 35 

Radicle (radic, a root), 78 

Radius, 127 

Receptaculum seminis, 95, 1 10 

Rediae — 

of Distomum haematobium, 91 
of Liver-fluke, 206 

Renal portal circulation, 141 

Reproduction, 23-39 

Reproductive system — 
in Amoeba, 160 
in Bryophytes, 67 
in Ccelenterata, 87-90 
in Craniata, 152-155 
in Crustacea, 105 
in Earth-worm, 91, 92, 94, 95 
in Echinodermata, 100 
in Gregarina, 186, 187 
in Hydra, 194 
in Hydrozoa, 87-89 
in Insecta, no 
in Lamellibranchiata, 118 
in Liver-fluke, 201-203 
in Phanerogamia, 74-78 
in Protococcus pluvialis, 166 
in Protoccocus viridis, 164 
in Pteridophytes, 71 
in Sea-anemones, 90 
in Sponges, 85, 86, 87 



Reproductive system (continued) — 

in Tape-worms, 240 

in Thallophytes, 65 

in Vorticella, 180-182 

in Yeast plant, 1 61 -162 
Respiratory system — 

in Craniata, 135- 1 38 

in Crustacea, 104 

in Earth-worm, 93, 94 

in Echinodermata, 100 

in Gasteropoda, 118 

in Insecta, 107, 108 

in Lamellibranchiata, 117 

in Protococcus pluvialis, 167 

inTracheata, 105, 107, 116 
Reticulum, 12, 13 
Rhizoid (£t£a, root; tldos, form), 

66 
Rhizopoda, 84 
Ribs, 128 
Ribbon-worms, 92 
Ringed-worms, 94 
Root- 
cap, 60 
figure, 61 

growing point of, 60 

structure, 59, 60 
Rotifers, 96 
Round-worms, 91, 94 



Saccharomyces cerevisiae (aaKxa-pov, 
sugar; ^ktjs, fungus), 161 

Sagitta, 96 

Salivary glands, 131 

Saprophytes (<rairp6s, putrid ; 
4>vtov, a plant), Thallophytes 
obtaining their nourishment 
from decomposing organic 
matter, 66 

Sarcoptes hominis, 1 14 

Scapulae, 125 



Digitized 



by Google 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



281 



Scolex (o-kwXtjI-, a worm), 215 

Sea-anenomes, 87, 89, 90 

Sea-cows, 258 

Sea-cucumbers, 96 

Sea-spiders, 112 

Sea-urchins, 96 

Segmentation (segmentutn, a piece 

cut off), 23, 28 

figure, 28, 30 
complete, holoblastic, 29 
partial, meroblastic, 29 
Segmentation or cleavage cavity, 

29 
Sense organs, 150 
Sensory root, 150 
Sepals (separ, separate), 74 
Sheep-rot, produced by Liver-fluke, 

197, 207 
Shell gland — 

in Liver-fluke, 203 
in Tape-worms, 226 
Shrimps, 102 
Sieve tubes, 56 
Sinus venosus, 140 
Skeleton, 121-130 
Skull, 129 
Sirenia, 258 
Snails, 116 
Snakes, 124 
Somatopleure (aofia, the body; 

irXevpbv, the side), 38 
Somite (swfia, the body), 242 
Son (acopos, a heap), a collection 

of sporangia on the under 

surfaces of fern leaves, 70 
Spermatophores (airtpfxa, a seed ; 

<j>opi<a, to carry), 249 
Spermatozoon (airtpfxa, a seed; 

ft*)?, animal), 25, 26 
figure, 26 
Sperm mother-cell, 25 
Sphenoid bone, 130 . 
Spiders, 102, 105, 112, 113, 114 



Spinal cord, 145, 146 

Spinal nerves, 150 

Spiracle, 252 

Spirilla, 173 

Spirogyra (spira, a coil ; gyrus, a 

revolution), 63 
Splanchnopleure (<rir\ayxyov, an 

intestine; irXevpdv, the side)*- 

38 

Sponge, 85 
Spongilla, 86 

reproduction of, 86, 87 
Spongioplasm, the reticulum, or 

denser part of protoplasm^ 

12 
Sphincter (o-Qlyyta, I bind). 
Sporangium (o-iropd, a seed ; &y- 

yeiov, a vessel), a spore case, 

70 
Spores (awopa, a seed), an asexual 

reproductive cell. 
Sporocyst (o-iropd, a seed ; icvaris, 

a bladder), 206 
Sporozoa, 84 
Squamosals, 130 
Stamens (stamen, a thread), 74 
Starch, 18 
Star-fishes, 96 
Stem — 

tissues of, 5 

figures, 54, 55, 57 

growing point of, 60 
Sternum, 128 

Stigma (ffrlyfjuz, a spot), 75 
Stomach, 133 

Stomata (ardfia, a mouth), aper- 
tures in the epidermis of a 

leaf, 54 
figure, 54 
Stomodceum {mbfia, mouth ; o5cu- 

6s, belonging to a way), 131 
Stone canal, 98 
Strobila, 208 



Digitized 



by Google 



282 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



Structureless or supporting lamella 
(lamella, a thin plate), 192 

Style (stylus, a column), 75 

Sundew, 81, 82 

Swimming bladder, 135 

Symbiosis (<rvfipito<ris, a living 
with), 17 
in Convoluta Roscoffensis, 81 

(note) 
in Lichen, 66 

Systemic circulation, 142 



Tadpole, 133 

Taenia echinococcus, 215 

Taenia medi oca nel lata, or saginata, 

215 
Taenia solium, 210, 215 
Tape-worms (cestodes), 208-228 

anatomy of, 218 

cysticercus of, 211 

development of, 210 

excretory system of, 223 

figures of, 208-227 

head of, 220 

history, 228 

hydatid of, 211 

life history of, 210 

neck of, 220 

nervous system of, 221 

proscolex of, 211 

reproductive system of, 224 
Tarsus, 127 
Tentacles, 1 90 
Testes, 153 

in Craniata, 153 

in Dog-fish, 254 

in Earth-worm, 94 

in Echinodermata, 100 

in Hydra, 194, 195 

in Insecta, no 

in Leech, 249 



Testes (continued) — 
in Liver-fluke, 201 
in Mollusca, 118 
in Tape-worm, 225 
Thalamencephalon, 147 
Thallus (0a\\o$, a twig), 63 
Thallophytes (OaWos, a twig; <f>vT6v, 
a plant), 63-66 
figures, 64, 65 
Thread cell, 192 
Thymus gland, 133 
Thyroid body, 133 
Tibia, 127 
Tissues, 40-62 

animal tissues, 43-51 
botryoidal tissue, 248 
connective, 43, 45 

figure, 45 
epithelial, 43 
figure, 44 
fat, 46 

muscular, 43, 47 
figures, 48, 49 
nervous, 43, 48 
plant tissues, 52-62 

figures, 53, 54, 55, 57, 61 
collenchymatous, 55 
ground or fundamental, 53, 54 
meristem, 52 
parenchymatous, 55, 56 
permanent, 52 
prosenchymatous, 55 
Tongue, 131 
Torula, 161 
Trabecule cranii, 130 
Tracheata, 105-116 
Tradescantia-virginica, 6 
Transverse processes, 122 
Trematodes, 91 
Trichina spiralis, 236-306 

figure, 237 
Trichocephalus dispar, 233, 234 
figure, 234 



Digitized 



by Google 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



283 



Trichinosis, 238 
Truncus arteriosus, 253 
Tunicata, 121 
Turbellaria, 91 

U 

Ulna, 127 

Ureters, 145 

Urethra, 155 

Urinary organs, see Excretory 

System. 
Urochorda, 121 
Uterus — 

in Craniate, 155 

in Liver-fluke, 202 

in Mammalia, 264 

in Nematodes, 229 

in Tape-worms, 227 



Vacuoles (vacuum, empty), descrip- 
tion of, 12, 13 
in Amoeba, 158 
in Hydra, 180 
in Plant-cells, 14 
in Vorticella, 177 
in Yeast-plant, 161 
Vagina (vagina, & sheath), 155 
Vascular cryptogams, 70, 73 
Vas deferens (vas, vessel ; defero, 
to carry away), the vessel 
carrying male generative pro- 
ducts to the exterior. 
Vasa efferentia (vas, vessel ; effero, 
to carry off), the efferent ducts 
of the testis. 
Vaucheria, 63 
Ventricles of brain, 140 
third, 147 
fourth, 147 
lateral, 147 



Ventricles of heart, 140, 142 

Vermes, see Worms. 

Vertebrata, 120, 155 

Vertebrae, 122 

Vesicula seminalis (dim. of vesica, a 

bladder ; semen, a seed), 254 
Vestibule, 179 
Visceral arches, 123 
Visceral skeleton, 123 
Vitellarian ducts (vitellus, yolk), 

203 
Viviparous (vivas, living; pario, to 

beget), born alive. 
Vocal cords, 137 

Vorticella (dim. of vortex, an eddy), 
176-182 

anatomy of, 177 

excretory organ in, 180 

figures, 178, 181 

reproduction of, 1 80- 182 

W 

Water vascular system — 

in Echinodermata, 97, 98, 99, 
100 

in Tape-worm, 223 
Water fleas, 102, 105 
Whales, 259 
Wheel animalcules, 96 
Wings, 124 
Wolffian body, 155 
Wood, see Xylem. 

fibre cells, 56 

vessels, 56 
Woodlice, 102 
Worms, 90-96 



Xylem (£6\ov t wood), the internal 
part of the fibrovascular bun- 
dle, 56 



Digitized 



by Google 



284 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY. 



Yeast plant, 16 1 -163 
anatomy of, 161 
physiology of, 162 
reproduction of, 161 

Yolk, 27 

Yolk gland— 

in Liver fluke, 203 
in Tape-worms, 226 



Zoo glee a condition of Bacteria ($Q>ov r 
an animal; 7X0/01, glue), 172 

Zoology (t&ov, an animal ; \oyos, 
a discourse), the part of 
Biology which relates to 
animals. 

Zoospores (fQov, an animal ; o"jropd r 
a seed), 166 



Printed by Hazell, Watson, & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury. 



Digitized 



by Google 






^GoOgl 



Digitized by VjUVJ V L*L 



Digitized 



by Google 






____-. ._ .. 7 . 



This book should be returned to 
the Library on or before the last date 
stamped below. 

A fine of five cents a day is incurred 
by retaining it beyond the specified 
time. 

Please return promptly. 



T^ 



Digitized 



byCjO' 



ogle 



